2021 IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC)
Indianapolis, USA. September 19-21, 2021

AUDRIC2: A Modular and Highly Interconnected Automated Driving
Framework Focus on Decision Making and Vehicle Control

2021 IEEE International Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC) | 978-1-7281-9142-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ITSC48978.2021.9564640

Ray Lattaruloa , Carlos Hidalgoa , Asier Arizalab , and Joshue Pereza
ing simulation software from the Swedish National Road
and Transport Research Institute (VTI) and a framework
for traffic and network simulation specifically designed for
testing platoon applications (Platooning Extension for Veins,
or Plexe). The strength of the approach relies on combining
three different simulators providing the best advantages of
each one during testing.
Another approach proposed a framework for sensor fusion
of self-driving cars and other autonomous robots [5]. The
main goal of the contribution was to design a universal and
scalable platform for building up robust 3D models of the
agent’s surrounding environment by fusing a wide range
of various sensors. The authors have considered RGB and
thermal cameras, 3D LiDARs, 3D IMU, and a GNSS. The
framework covers a complete pipeline from data loading,
filtering, pre-processing, environment model construction,
visualization, and data storage. The software was design to
be compatible with ROS. Nevertheless, high performance,
high concurrency, and multi-threading were not considered
because it is looking for a clear architecture, easy to scale
up, and simple pipeline.
Down in the control hierarchy, when it comes to decisionmaking based on the data gotten from the perception system,
there are several recent proposals. In [6] probabilistic methods are used to evaluate the possibility of collision to assess
and make safe decisions on highway situations. In their
implementation with ROS, they have access to information
about the pilot state (e.g., whether they are distracted or
healthy). The driver state permits to implement this in the
risk calculus and taking action in consequence.
Some other approaches have achieved partially scalable
and replicable solutions in multiple platforms. On the project
SmartShuttle, an automated driving architecture has unified
software, hardware, control, and decision targeting low-speed
shuttles [7]. This approach was validated in a Ford Fusion
and a Dash EV. Later on, the approach was tested in another
two vehicles of the same model (newer versions).
A newer approach has presented an architecture for automated cars based on ROS2 [8]. The main goal has been
to achieve the demands of real-time, high reliability, and
requisites of functional safety, along with ROS benefits such
as standardized messages and distributed architectures.
Considering the literature, this work presents the updated
version of the AUDRIC (AUtomated DRIving Core) framework previously introduced in [9]. This version comes with
a modular scheme designed to work with different real and
virtual platforms. Moreover, the first developed modules are
described which guarantee safe guidance of the vehicle under

Abstract— Last years, automated vehicle technologies made
considerable progress in academia and the industry. However,
there is still a need for more scalable solutions which ensure
fast progress between the prototypes and the final deployments.
In this sense, this work introduces the updated version of the
AUtomated DRIving Core framework (AUDRIC), which aims
for robust and reliable vehicle decision-making and control
algorithms. The solution is modular and provides MATLAB
and ROS interfaces. Also, it has the integration links between
the CARLA simulator and Dynacar (in-house simulator). The
Autoware.AI framework was integrated to support vehicle
perception. This framework targets non-holonomic ground
vehicles, such as passenger cars, buses, shuttles, non-holonomic
industrial AGV, etc. A simulation around Tecnalia premises was
used to verify the provided functionalities (Basque Country,
Spain). This framework will continue its development with the
support of the European project SHOW. Vehicle cooperation
functions are considered as an upcoming feature.

I. INTRODUCTION
Automated vehicles have shown great potential for improving safety, vehicle comfort, and efficiency during driving
tasks. Nevertheless, robust and optimal solutions for vehicle
decision and control are demanded in compliance with the
geometry of the maps, vehicle dimensions, its dynamics, and
safety [1].
The decision making processes of the vehicle has been
described, classically, as a hierarchical structure where some
of the layers are: i) routing based on requirements of the
passengers, traffic conditions, and road network; ii) reasoning
through a sequence of driving behaviors such as turning,
lane-changing, among others; and iii) the generation of
feasible trajectories that lead the vehicle safely [2]. Additionally, the control layer is in charge of tracking the
navigation commands provided by vehicle planning through
the trajectory (path and speed profile) [3].
Since the DARPA challenges and even more recently,
many groups and companies have tried to standardized
frameworks for automated driving obtaining good results.
Moreover, newer approaches are looking for more general
and scalable solutions that bring prototypes to commercial
deployments.
In these terms, a simulation framework for testing and
evaluating cooperative intelligent transportation system (CITS) was proposed [4]. The approach combines the driva Ray
Lattarulo, Carlos Hidalgo, and Joshue Perez are
with TECNALIA, Basque Research and Technology Alliance
(BRTA)
rayalejandro.lattarulo@tecnalia.com,

carlos.hidalgo@tecnalia.com, and
joshue.perez@tecnalia.com
b Asier Arizala is with University of the Basque Country, 48013 Bilbao,Spain aarizala002@ikasle.ehu.eus

978-1-7281-9142-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

763

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 02:37:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

mixed traffic circumstances, using the ROS or MATLAB
interfaces provided in the framework. A simulation test
case, around Tecnalia premises (Basque Country, Spain), was
proposed to demonstrate the benefits of the proposal. The
continuous development and integration of the framework
of the supported interfaces (ROS and Matlab) are the main
differences compared to the literature. The European project
SHOW will be used to finance -partially- the development
of the ROS and Matlab interfaces. In the future, an interface
for ROS2 will be included (subject to interest and budget).
The rest of the work is structured as follows, section
II presents the explanation of the second version of the
AUDRIC framework, section II gives details about each
module and the interfaces and integration links with simulation environments and other frameworks. In section III,
several validation scenarios, in the framework of the European project SHOW, are explained and the results of the
first simulation tests are presented. Finally, the summary of
conclusions future works is presented in the section IV.

[9]:
Acquisition: collecting sensor information.
Perception: vehicle and environment modeling using
sensor information and communications.
• Communication:
interaction among infrastructure,
pedestrians, and vehicles (V2X).
• Decision: algorithms for high-level decision making,
trajectory generation, collaboration among vehicles, etc.
• Control: vehicle tracking controllers. They can be coupled (steering and pedals in one controller) or decoupled
(steering and pedals in different controllers).
• Actuation: interaction of the control signals with the
vehicle interface to move the actuators, e.g. electric
signals to external motors coupled to the pedals or
steering wheel, CAN-Bus messages to interact with Xby-wire components, etc.
•
•

II. AUDRIC: AUTO MATED DRI VING C ORE V2.0
The AUDRIC framework was presented for the first time
in 2017 [9]. However, it received its name some months
later. It used to contain basic methods (e.g. static trajectories,
simple controllers, etc) to guide the vehicle over a predefined
route which was the basis for developing a long number
of European and local projects [10]. Nevertheless, great
changes have arisen in the automated driving field, as we
mentioned in the introduction. This demands an improvement
of AUDRIC to meet new minimum needs of the technology,
such as:
• Modular tasks.
• Safe guidance of the vehicle under mixed traffic circumstances (it could not consider overtaking necessarily).
• Comfort and smoothness during a normal operation.
• Capacities to detect and modelling the environment, as
well as communication with infrastructure and other
vehicles on the road.
• The use of complex simulation environments, during the
testing stage, that consider more details on the road, e.g.
buildings, pedestrians’ movement, other vehicles, etc.
Moreover, we have included another requirement which is
standardizing the solution for all ground vehicles with nonholonomic constraints, at the moment, without considering a
load connected with a joint, e.g. trailers, trucks, etc.
Some of the simulation environments and vehicles tested
with the AUDRIC2 framework, or some of its modules, are:
Dynacar simulation environment (top-left Fig. 1), CARLA
simulator (top-right Fig. 1), a modified Renault Twizy
(middle-left Fig. 1), a double Ackermann ground vehicle
(middle-right Fig. 1), and it is expected to be tested in
upcoming month on an electric Gulliver shuttle (bottom-left
Fig. 1), and a 12m-long electric bus (bottom-right Fig. 1).
However, this topic will be covered in more detail on section
III.
In these terms, AUDRIC2 has been developed as a C++ library preserving its initial six-modules architecture including

Fig. 1. Platforms using AUDRIC. (top-left). (top-right) 2 . (middle-left).
(middle-right). (bottom-left). (bottom-right).

The acquisition and actuation modules rely on the hardware/software architecture of the considered platform. The
state of the art has impressive approaches to generate vehicle positioning and inertial values, as well as environment
perception; due to these reasons, the perception module is integrated from an external source and is bridged to AUDRIC.
Communication is solved by standardized devices (V2X).
However, the bridge between the AUDRIC information and
the V2X devices is considered as part of the framework
as well as internet-based data exchanging, e.g. exchange
of MQTT messages with an external Data Management
Platform. Considering these conditions, the framework is
focused, mainly, on decision-making and vehicle control
solutions which are easier to escalate and to generate a
modular framework that targets non-holonomic automated
vehicles.
2 Image extracted from https://carla.readthedocs.io/en/0.
9.11/adv_rendering_options/

764
Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 02:37:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2.

The module is in charge of guiding the vehicle with the
generation of a drivable space (bottom of Fig. 3) which
has the outer right and left boundaries of the road, and
the reference of the center of the lane that is more in the
right side of the road. This ensures safe driving without
compromising the traffic flow. This reference can be changed
to the center of another lane, based on some criteria that will
be studied in the future, e.g. merging, platoon, etc.
Moreover, the drivable space is obtained considering the
shortest path from the vehicle to the goal considering the
connections of the road map.
2) Trajectory Generator: This function is part of the
decision module (Fig. 2) and it uses the information of
the drivable space as well as the lane reference and speed
reference from the globalRoadFollower to generate safe,
smooth, and continuous trajectories (path and speed) to be
tracked by the vehicle controllers.
The module uses motion primitives derived from Bézier
curves based on previous approaches presented by the group
[12] [13].

Categories (modules) into the AUDRIC Framework

An abstraction of the framework, divided into stages or
modules, is presented in Fig. 2. The currently available
modules will be detailed in the following sections as well
as the interfaces used to deploy the framework.
A. Modules
1) Global Road Planner: This function is part of the
decision module (Fig. 2) and it plans the global route that
leads the vehicle to its destination. The module relies on map
information provided via an OSM file which uses a format
inspired by the Lanelet2 standard [11], nevertheless, it is a
simplified version of the aforementioned.

Fig. 4.

Fig. 3.

Trajectory generation

This method generates layers of motion primitives as
it is presented in Fig. 4. The best trajectory candidate is
given by weighting the farther it reaches, the smoothness
of the trajectory, and the closeness to the driving reference.
Moreover, the computation of the travel distance considers,
in the case of vehicles, the propagation of other agents on
the road. In the case of agents out of the road limits, the
propagation is performed following the same direction of
the agent. Additionally, the trajectory will cruise the vehicle,
totally (considering the vehicle geometry), into the drivable
space boundaries.
A separate publication is intended to explain all the
details of the approach as well as performing extensive tests
considering specific and real driving scenarios.
3) Control Lateral Model Based: This solution is part of
the control module (Fig. 2) and it is a lateral tracking controller (AUDRIC provides decoupled lateral and longitudinal
motion controllers). It is inspired by the method of Model
Predictive Control, nevertheless, the solution space is limited
to a set of possible motion candidates based on the rate of
change of the steering angle (C1 , ..., Ci , ..., Cn on Fig. 5).

Road definition

The top of Fig. 3 depicts an area of a map described by
lanes. These lanes are defined as a relationship composed
of a right and a left boundary where those are defined by
polylines (array of points). A continuous road, which has
been made from lane pieces, must have the starting nodes
(boundaries) of the current lane equal to the ending nodes
of the previous lane. Moreover, the relationship contains
the speed limit and the presence of a yield, stop sign, or
pedestrian crossing at the end of the lane.
765

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 02:37:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 5.

1) ROS: This interface supports all the modules previously mention on section II-A. Nevertheless, it includes
interfaces (bridges) to interact with the perception module
of Autoware.ai [14]. Currently, it is supported the NDT
matching algorithm used to generate the vehicle position
based on LiDAR information, as well as the EKF filter. In
terms of obstacle detection, the framework has a bridge to
connect the obstacle detected with the Autoware clustering
algorithm and its UKF algorithm to estimate its movement
direction and speed. We are working to integrate a camera
sensor that improves the detection of obstacles on the road.
2) MATLAB/Simulink: Simulink is a block diagram environment for multi-domain simulation and Model-Based
Design. It supports system-level design, simulation, automatic code generation, and continuous test and verification
of embedded systems. Thanks to the so-called MEX File
Functions, all the modules developed in AUDRIC2 can be
integrated since allows C/C++ programs to behave just like
MATLAB functions. In Fig. 6 a more detailed implementation of AUDIRC2 in Simulink can be observed. Where
each block corresponds to one of the six-module architecture
described previously.

Lateral controller based on steering wheel candidates

The model used is a kinematic bicycle model, as it is
shown in Fig 5. The set of functions defining the model are
the following:

θ̇ = ω =

v
l
v tan(δ)
& tan(δ) =
−→ θ̇ =
r
r
l
θ = θ0 + ω∆t

(1)
(2)

x = x0 + v∆t cos (θ)

(3)

y = y0 + v∆t sin (θ)

(4)

v is the vehicle speed (this approach considers a constant
speed), l is the wheelbase, r is the turning radius, ω is the
yaw rate, θ is the orientation, x, y are the positions in a
Cartesian coordinate system, ∆t is the time interval, and δ
is the steering angle.
The candidates are generated based on constant rate
change of the steering angle ( dδ
dt ) and with a change to
an opposite-sign value (its maximum value is denoted as
dδ
dt max ). For example based on Fig 5, 6 candidates are
dδ
generated from − dδ
dt max and dt max , 3 values are constant
and 3 change from a positive or negative value to another one
with opposite-sign (at fraction of the maximum evaluation
time).
4) Control Longitudinal Linear: This function resolves
the longitudinal vehicle control and it is also part of the
control module. It generates a throttle of brake signal based
on a function that relates the speed error with an action value.
Nevertheless, it includes a fuzzy logic controller explained
in previous articles [9]. In the future, this controller will be
updated with a newer version based on a model.

Fig. 6.

AUDRIC2 Simulink block diagram.

Thanks to environmental compatibility, in addition to the
developed functions, TCP/UDP bridges can be made to interact with outside sources e.j. external simulators. Therefore,
developing a UDP bridge connection with the Dynacar [15]
simulator can be carried out. By doing so, a reliable vehicle
representation can be obtained while having a 3D interface
for monitoring purposes [16].
Moreover to the aforementioned integration, connections
with actuators or D-GPS can be made through CAN Toolbox
already integrated with the MATLAB environment. Works
using these features with the AUDRIC previous version
can be observed in the following articles [17], [18], [19],
where validation of merging, overtaking, and car following
maneuvers are presented.
Taking into consideration, the progress made with the
framework, developments in different maneuvers such as
roundabout platoon merging are planned in the future. Moreover, with the integration of the Commsignia V2X devices,
a new car following module version is under development,
where vehicles with multiple dynamics (e.g. a 12m-long bus,
Gulliver shuttle, or Renault Twizy 80) are being contemplated.

B. Interfaces
For this article, the interfaces are all the environments
where AUDRIC2 can be executed. The modules can be
integrated with different environments or platforms because
they are programmed in C++, and it has 2 function wrappers
around ROS and MATLAB/Simulink. In the future, we are
planning to integrate the modules in ROS2 as well.
766

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 02:37:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3) Integration with CARLA simulator: Released in 2017,
CARLA simulator is one of the most important automated
vehicle-oriented open-source simulators nowadays. The regular updates it receives from a highly active community give
this software a great versatility when it comes to validating
experimental algorithms [20], [21]. Its compatibility with
ROS makes it easy to integrate with other platforms like
Autoware [22], [23] or MATLAB [24]. Therefore, exists a
big interest in testing AUDRIC2 in CARLA simulator. Our
current developments are going towards this goal, which will
be studied in detail in future works.

same city, those are shown in Fig. 7 (3D Maps generated
with Autoware which is used as a complement of the perception for the AUDRIC2 Framework). The upper part of the
aforementioned figure is a depot of one of the companies in
charge of public urban transport (Carabanchel depot), and the
lower part is an open-traffic scenario that connects a subway
station with the innovation hub of ”La Nave” (Villaverde
scenario), both in the Madrid region.
Platooning, teleoperation, automated docking/parking, and
automated depot management are some of the use cases that
will be tested in the Carabanchel depot. Automated passenger
transport service, using shuttles, will be considered in the
Villaverde scenario where a variety of difficult conditions
will be present. Mixed traffic circumstances, regulated (traffic
lights) and non-regulated intersections, narrow roads, high
density of pedestrians, among others are some of the conditions present in this last scenario.
The vehicles used, in both scenarios, are shown in Fig. 1
and they are two automated Renault Twizy, one 12m electric
bus, and two automated shuttle. Currently, the Twizy and
the electric bus are receiving improvements in hardware and
software, and the electric shuttles (Gulliver model) are in
the process of setting up the actuators and the interface to
control it automatically.

III. VALIDATION SCENARIO
The previous sections have highlighted the intention of
using AUDRIC2 to control different vehicles (Fig. 1). The
new vehicles that will use this solution will be a 12 meters
electric bus and two electric shuttles into the framework of
the European project SHOW.
In these terms, the current section contains the explanation
of one of the sites proposed in the project SHOW and the
first simulations conducted in this context.

B. Preliminary tests: Basque Country
As it was mentioned in previous sections, the objective
of this article is to present the updated version of the
AUDRIC2 framework and its deployment in the SHOW
project. Nevertheless, a real test will be considered in the
final demonstration of the project (end of 2023). Moreover,
the vehicles do not have the permits to drive in automated
mode in Madrid.
In these terms, the first tests will be conducted at Tecnalia
premises in the Basque Country (Spain) around the technological park, using the automated Renault Twizy platform.
For this work, the tests are in simulation environments doing
the definition of the scenario as close as possible to the real
one.
The parameters used for the simulation, and the decision
and control algorithm, are the following:

Fig. 7.

Veh. length
Veh. width
Veh. wheelbase
Max. steering angle
Max. time for turning

Scenarios considered in the SHOW project, Madrid pilot

A. European project SHOW

2.4 meters
1.4 meters
1.75 meters
32◦
2 second

The system used to execute the algorithm is a Core i76820HQ with 32GB of RAM along with the ROS interface
(ROS Melodic, Ubuntu 18.04 LTS).
Fig. 8, at its top, presents the test case conditions, around
Tecnalia premises, that will be tested as a verification phase
before facing Madrid scenarios. This scenario has an approximated length of 1.5km which is similar to the longest
scenario of Madrid (Villaverde). It has a roundabout and a
90◦ left turn. The rest of the scenario is shaped by soft and

SHOW is a European initiative which is intended to bring
the automated operation of Personal Transport (PT) and
Demand-Responsive Transport (DRT) services considering
dense city traffic, peri-urban areas, and neighborhoods in
20 different European cities of 13 countries. The vehicles
considered, in the project, are automated buses, robo-taxis,
cars, cargo vehicles, and shuttles.
This article considers the Spanish pilot in the city of
Madrid. It is separated into two different scenarios in the
767

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 02:37:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

tight bends. Moreover, a variety of merging conditions will
be considered and tested in future contributions.

important to highlight that this work does not present moving
obstacles due to a deeper study will be presented on an article
dedicated to the trajectoryGenerator module. For further
information about moving obstacles, a method similar to the
one previously presented in [18] is used in this new version
of the algorithm.

Fig. 10.

Fig. 8.

Fig. 10 depicts the capacity of manage a 90◦ left turn.
The original map is depicted in white, the boundaries of the
drivable space are green, the generated trajectory is in yellow
and the time propagation of the lateral control (steering
wheel) is in red. The length of the control prediction reduces
as the vehicle arrives at the intersection, and it increases
when the vehicle exits the turn. This is mainly produced by
the speed profile which is associated with the curvature of
the trajectory (refer to Fig. 8 between a distance of 1000 and
1200 meters).

First tests without obstacles.

The middle and lower part of Fig. 8 presents the curvature
and speed profile respectively. Those values are extracted
from the green trajectory presented at the top of the aforementioned figure. One of the main advantages of the trajectoryGenerator module is the smoothness of the curvature
which improves the tracking of the steering control, as well
as the generation of smooth and comfortable speed profiles.

Fig. 11.

Fig. 9.

View of the trajectory generation and control on the left turn.

Analysis of the steering delay and its effect on real test cases.

The incidence of the turning time (time to move the
steering wheel from straight position to the maximum at
the right or left side which is a value used to calculate the
dδ/dtmax used by the Control Lateral Model Based) in the
response of the controller is appreciated in Fig. 11. The time
of moving the steering wheel has been simulated to generate
a close-to-reality result. Mostly, the lateral error between the
vehicle position and its desired trajectory is under 10cm in

Static obstacles in the roundabout.

Furthermore, Fig. 9 depicts the capacity of the framework
to face obstacles under difficult circumstances such as on
a bent segment or in the middle of a roundabout. It is
768

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 02:37:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

most of the cases. Nevertheless, this error increases along
with the turning time of the steering wheel.
In these terms, the control values will be studied in more
detail in the real vehicle due to simulated values do not
provide enough information to obtain a conclusion about the
performance of the control method. However, it is important
to highlight that the expected result is close to this one
because the steering wheel rate has been considered in the
controller.

[6] S. Noh and K. An, “Decision-making framework for automated
driving in highway environments,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 58–71, 2017.
[7] S. Y. Gelbal, B. Aksun-Guvenc, and L. Guvenc, “Smartshuttle: Model
based design and evaluation of automated on-demand shuttles for
solving the first-mile and last-mile problem in a smart city,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.12431, 2020.
[8] M. Reke, D. Peter, J. Schulte-Tigges, S. Schiffer, A. Ferrein, T. Walter,
and D. Matheis, “A self-driving car architecture in ros2,” in 2020
International SAUPEC/RobMech/PRASA Conference. IEEE, 2020,
pp. 1–6.
[9] R. Lattarulo, J. Pérez, and M. Dendaluce, “A complete framework
for developing and testing automated driving controllers,” IFACPapersOnLine, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 258–263, 2017.
[10] R. Lattarulo, L. González, E. Martı́, J. Matute, M. Marcano, and
J. Pérez, “Urban motion planning framework based on n-bézier curves
considering comfort and safety,” Journal of Advanced Transportation,
vol. 2018, 2018.
[11] F. Poggenhans, J.-H. Pauls, J. Janosovits, S. Orf, M. Naumann,
F. Kuhnt, and M. Mayr, “Lanelet2: A high-definition map framework
for the future of automated driving,” in 2018 21st International
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC).
IEEE,
2018, pp. 1672–1679.
[12] R. Lattarulo, L. González, and J. Perez, “Real-time trajectory planning method based on n-order curve optimization,” in 2020 24th
International Conference on System Theory, Control and Computing
(ICSTCC). IEEE, 2020, pp. 751–756.
[13] R. Lattarulo and J. Perez, “Fast real-time trajectory planning method
with 3rd-order curve optimization for automated vehicles,” in 2020
IEEE 23rd International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITSC). IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[14] S. Kato, S. Tokunaga, Y. Maruyama, S. Maeda, M. Hirabayashi,
Y. Kitsukawa, A. Monrroy, T. Ando, Y. Fujii, and T. Azumi, “Autoware
on board: Enabling autonomous vehicles with embedded systems,”
in 2018 ACM/IEEE 9th International Conference on Cyber-Physical
Systems (ICCPS). IEEE, 2018, pp. 287–296.
[15] A. Parra, A. J. Rodrı́guez, A. Zubizarreta, and J. Pérez, “Validation
of a real-time capable multibody vehicle dynamics formulation for
automotive testing frameworks based on simulation,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 213 253–213 265, 2020.
[16] J. A. Matute-Peaspan, A. Zubizarreta-Pico, and S. E. Diaz-Briceno, “A
vehicle simulation model and automated driving features validation
for low-speed high automation applications,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2020.
[17] C. E. H. Vieira, M. Marcano, G. Fernández, and J. M. Pérez,
“Maniobras cooperativas aplicadas a vehı́culos automatizados en entornos virtuales y reales,” Revista Iberoamericana de Automática e
Informática industrial, 2019.
[18] R. Lattarulo and J. Pérez Rastelli, “A hybrid planning approach based
on mpc and parametric curves for overtaking maneuvers,” Sensors,
vol. 21, no. 2, p. 595, 2021.
[19] C. Hidalgo, R. Lattarulo, C. Flores, and P. Rastelli, “Platoon merging
approach based on hybrid trajectory planning and cacc strategies,”
Sensors, vol. 21, no. 8, p. 2626, 2021.
[20] R. Gutiérrez, E. López-Guillén, L. M. Bergasa, R. Barea, Ó. Pérez,
C. Gómez-Huélamo, F. Arango, J. Del Egido, and J. López-Fernández,
“A waypoint tracking controller for autonomous road vehicles using
ROS framework,” Sensors (Switzerland), vol. 20, no. 14, 2020.
[21] T. Buhet, E. Wirbel, and X. Perrotton, “Conditional vehicle trajectories
prediction in carla urban environment,” Proceedings - 2019 International Conference on Computer Vision Workshop, ICCVW 2019, pp.
2310–2319, 2019.
[22] S. Stević, M. Krunić, M. Dragojević, , and N. Kaprocki, “Development
and validation of ADAS perception application in ROS environment
integrated with CARLA simulator,” Telfor Journal, vol. 12, no. 1, pp.
40–45, 2020.
[23] ——, “Development of ADAS perception applications in ROS and
“Software-In-the-Loop” validation with CARLA simulator,” Telfor
Journal, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 40–45, 2020.
[24] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun,
“CARLA: An Open Urban Driving Simulator,” PMLR, no. CoRL,
pp. 1–16, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.03938

IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
This article has presented an updated version of an automated driving framework that was proposed in 2017. It has
included a novel interface to ROS along with the previous
one (based only on MATLAB/Simulink). Moreover, this new
version of the AUDRIC2 framework will be embedded in
different vehicles, such as cars, shuttles, buses, and nonholonomic mobile robots. This is an important contribution
because it can prove the capacity to be a scalable framework
considering vehicles with different dynamics and geometries.
The article highlights that AUDRIC2 is aiming at decisionmaking and control algorithms for ground automated vehicles which demands the integration of a 3rd party software
to obtain vehicle and obstacle information (mainly in the
perception stage). In these terms, the current version of
AUDRIC2 can be combined with the Autoware framework,
specifically Autoware.AI (based on ROS). This integration
will be explained in an upcoming article along with real
vehicle tests.
In terms of future work, real-platform tests have been
programmed for the upcoming month as well as the creation
of the ROS2 interface that permits the integration of the
newest version of Autoware.Auto. Moreover, the weather
conditions of the Basque Country will be exploit to make
more robust and resilient algorithms under foggy or rainy
conditions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the European Project SHOW
from the Horizon 2020 program under the grant agreement
No 875530 and the AUTOLIB project (ELKARTEK 2019
ref. KK-2019/00035; Gobierno Vasco)
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Godoy, A. Artuñedo, and J. Villagra, “Self-generated osm-based
driving corridors,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 20 113–20 125, 2019.
[2] Y. Huang, H. Ding, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, D. Cao, N. Xu, and
C. Hu, “A motion planning and tracking framework for autonomous
vehicles based on artificial potential field elaborated resistance network
approach,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 67, no. 2,
pp. 1376–1386, 2019.
[3] E. Thorn, S. Kimmel, , and M. Chaka, “A framework for automated
driving system testable cases and scenarios,” Report No. DOT HS 812
623, 2018.
[4] M. Aramrattana, T. Larsson, J. Jansson, and A. Nåbo, “A simulation
framework for cooperative intelligent transport systems testing and
evaluation,” Transportation research part F: traffic psychology and
behaviour, vol. 61, pp. 268–280, 2019.
[5] A. Ligocki, A. Jelinek, and L. Zalud, “Atlas fusion–modern framework for autonomous agent sensor data fusion,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.11991, 2020.

769
Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 02:37:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

