IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

3547

Event-Triggered Model Predictive Control for Autonomous Vehicle Path
Tracking: Validation Using CARLA Simulator
Zhaodong Zhou , Christopher Rother , and Jun Chen , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Model predictive control (MPC) has been widely researched for automotive control. However, the real-world application of MPC for autonomous vehicles (AV) is still limited due
to the high computational requirement of solving the real-time
optimization problem. To address this issue, this letter presents
an event-triggered MPC framework and illustrates its application
in AV path tracking control using the CARLA simulation environment. Unlike traditional time-triggered MPC, event-triggered
MPC solves the optimization problem only when an event is triggered. Otherwise, the previously optimized control sequence is
used to determine control action. Therefore, when following the
same path, event-triggered MPC solves fewer optimization problems than time-triggered MPC, thereby reducing the computation
requirements. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
approach, both time-triggered MPC and event-triggered MPC are
simulated and compared using CARLA. Results validate that the
proposed event-triggered MPC method reduces significant computation with acceptable performance degradation.
Index Terms—Model predictive control, event-triggered control,
autonomous vehicles, CARLA, path tracking.

NOMENCLATURE
Parameters
μ
Friction coefficient.
σ
Event-trigger threshold.
C
Corning stiffness of the wheels.
I
Vehicle rotational inertia in z axis.
L
Vehicle wheel base.
Lxf Distance from CG to front axis.
Lxr Distance from CG to rear axis.
m
Vehicle mass.
Variables
α Wheel slip angle.
F¯y Wheel lateral force in tire frame.
V̄  Vehicle corner velocity in wheel frame.
V̄ Vehicle corner velocity in vehicle frame.
ψ Vehicle heading angle.
Manuscript received 9 April 2023; accepted 10 April 2023. Date of publication
13 April 2023; date of current version 20 July 2023. This work was supported by
SECS Faculty Startup Fund from Oakland University. (Corresponding author:
Jun Chen.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Oakland University, Rochester, MI 48309 USA (e-mail: zhaodongzhou@
oakland.edu; crother@oakland.edu; junchen@oakland.edu).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIV.2023.3266941.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIV.2023.3266941

dy
Fy
px
py
r
u
vx
vy

Vehicle lateral offset for event-trigger determination.
Wheel lateral force in vehicle frame.
Vehicle location in x coordinate.
Vehicle location in y coordinate.
Vehicle angular velocity in z axis.
Steering angle.
Vehicle longitudinal velocity at CG.
Vehicle lateral velocity at CG.
I. INTRODUCTION

ITH the growing popularity of electric vehicles in recent
years, autonomous driving is emerging as a promising
technology to improve traffic efficiency and to reduce accidents
and congestion [1], [2], [3], [4]. In the real world, traffic scenario
is usually complex with lots of uncertainties, which requires a
stable and robust controller for AV [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10],
and MPC has been widely investigated to fulfill this requirement. MPC is a class of algorithms that compute a sequence
of manipulated variable adjustments to optimize the future behavior of a plant [11]. MPC consists of a prediction model,
rolling optimization, and feedback adjustment, and is able to
deal with constrained optimization problems [12]. Research
on the stability, robustness, and feasibility of MPC has also
achieved a lot of results [13], [14], [15], [16]. For example, [13]
presents an approach for a piecewise affine control law that
guarantees feasibility, stability and optimization performance
of MPC. In [14], stability conditions for stochastic autonomous
networked systems are discussed. In [15], a novel nonlinear
MPC scheme is proposed that guarantees closed-loop stability.
Explicit MPC is investigated in [16], achieving highly robust
control of the data exchange threshold in the presence of multiple
disturbances.
However, MPC is not without downsides. In particular, it
requires high computing power, and the hardware used by
existing AVs may not be powerful enough to ensure that the
optimization problem can be solved in real-time. In response to
this issue, event-triggered control has been proposed to reduce
the computational burden of MPC [17], [18], [19], [20], [21],
[22], [23], [24], [25]. For example, [17] proposes a robust eventtriggered controller that reduces communication and computational power by avoiding input updates during less-than-worstcase disturbances. Additionally, the feasibility and stability of
event-triggered MPC are studied in [19] for continuous-time
nonlinear systems, and in [21] and [24] for discrete-time constrained linear and nonlinear systems, respectively. In [20],

W

2379-8858 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 03:30:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3548

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

event-triggered MPC is used to control the switching of the
DC-DC boost converter to maintain the output voltage, where
over 90% of computation reduction is reported. Specifically, in
the time-triggered approach, the MPC is activated periodically,
which means the optimization problem starts automatically after the previous control loop has been completed. For eventtriggered MPC, the error between the predicted state and the
actual feedback is compared to a pre-selected threshold to trigger
the optimization problem, where the threshold can be calibrated
to achieve a balance between the MPC triggering frequency
and the path tracking accuracy. In authors’ previous work [23],
the event-triggered MPC has been shown to reduce significant
computation without sacrificing path-tracking performance, by
using a simple simulation environment.
However, the validations in relevant literature are usually
based on a simple simulation environment, making the benefit of
event-triggered MPC obsolete. See Section II for more details.
Therefore, a realistic and convincing simulation environment
is developed in this letter to validate the advantage of eventtriggered MPC by demonstrating its application to AV path
tracking. In particular, CARLA is adopted in this letter, which
is an open-source high-fidelity AV simulation platform that can
simulate real urban driving environments to design, test, and
validate AV control [26]. Several changes are made to facilitate
the testing of event-triggered MPC, including implementing a
Bezier curve [27] for path reference generation and replacing
lateral PID control with MPC. Both time-triggered and eventtriggered MPC are simulated and compared in CARLA. It is
found that event-triggered MPC not only ensures path tracking accuracy but also significantly reduces the computational
burden.
The remainder of this letter is organized as follows. Section II
reviews relevant literature and highlights our contribution. Section III discusses the vehicle dynamic model used for MPC.
The proposed event-triggered MPC-based AV path-tracking
controller is presented in Section IV. Section V introduces
the CARLA environment and discusses the main simulation
results and findings on the comparison between conventional
time-triggered MPC and the proposed event-triggered MPC
method. Section VI concludes the letter.

II. LITERATURE REVIEW
In recent years, MPC has been widely investigated in the
context of autonomous driving, particularly due to the advance
of MPC [28], [29], [30], [31], [32]. In [28], [29], [30], MPC
is studied in vehicle control by using either dynamic model or
kinematic model, and in [31], [32] MPC is applied to trajectory
tracking, where the safe operation of an AV is achieved through
path planning. Though these works demonstrate promising results on applying MPC for AV, the high computation burden of
MPC is not addressed. To reduce the computational burden, the
event-triggered MPC is then studied in [33], [34], [35], [36],
[37], [38], [39] to reduce the number of optimization problems
that need to be solved in real-time. In [33], event-triggered MPC
is used in a multi-vehicle system for simultaneous tracking
and collision and obstacle avoidance. Event-triggered MPC

Fig. 1.

Bicycle vehicle dynamic model.

is used in vehicle-following control with unideal vehicle-tovehicle communications in [34]. In [36], [37], the problem of
the multi-vehicle cooperative path following is studied, while
vehicle platoon is studied in [35], [38] where MPC is use
for longitudinal control to track inter-vehicle distance. Authors
in [39] focus on the lateral trajectory tracking of unmanned
vehicles based on nonlinear MPC, and the proposed method can
significantly enhance real-time performance while maintaining
tracking accuracy. The authors’ previous work [22], [23] propose
event-triggered MPC and event-triggered LPV-MPC for AV path
tracking problems.
Even though the accuracy of event-triggered MPC and the
efficiency of reducing the amount of computation have been
demonstrated in various case studies in the aforementioned
works [22], [23], [33], [34], [35], [36], [37], [38], [39], the
validation of these papers is based on a simple environment,
mostly using Matlab or Simulink with a reduced order dynamic
or kinematic model. As listed in Table I, these models usually
have low order model and employ unrealistic assumptions for
the ease of simulation. For example, in [39], the longitudinal
velocity is assumed to be a constant value and longitudinal and
lateral aerodynamics are ignored. In [38], [39], the lateral tire dynamic is ignored. Table I compares the simulation environments
of related work and our work. The main contribution of this letter
is therefore the use of a realistic simulation environment, e.g.,
CARLA, to validate the advantage of event-triggered MPC. In
addition, several challenges in integrating event-triggered MPC
into the CARLA simulation environment are addressed, including parameter estimation, Bezier curve for path smoothing, and
reference re-sampling.
III. VEHICLE MODEL
This section describes a bicycle vehicle model together with
a tire model, which is used as the prediction model for MPC.
A. Vehicle Dynamic Model
The three-degrees-of-freedom bicycle vehicle model used
in this letter is shown in Fig. 1. The vehicle frame (local
frame) is placed at the vehicle’s center of gravity (CG). Define
T

x = px py vy ψ r as the state vector for the vehicle
model at the CG, where px and py are the global coordinates of

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 03:30:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

3549

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF RELATED WORK

the CG, vy is the vehicle lateral velocity, and ψ and r are the
vehicle heading angle and yaw rate in the counter-clockwise diT

rection. Then ẋ = ṗx ṗy v̇y ψ̇ ṙ , the set of dynamics
differential equations of the vehicle is given as follows,
ṗx = vx cos ψ − vy sin ψ

(1a)

ṗy = vx sin ψ + vy cos ψ
1 
v̇y = −vx r +
Fy,i
m

(1b)

ψ̇ = r

(1d)

(1c)

i=f,r

ṙ =

1
(Lxf Fy,f − Lxr Fy,r ) ,
I

(1e)

where vx is the vehicle longitudinal velocity at the CG. Since this
letter concerns vehicle lateral dynamics only, the longitudinal
vehicle velocity vx is treated as a measured disturbance in the
vehicle dynamics. Additionally, m is the vehicle mass, I is the
vehicle rotational inertia, and Lxf and Lxr are the distances
from the CG to the front and rear axles. Fy,i are the lateral tire
force on the front and rear tires. More details regarding vehicle
dynamics can be found in [40].

Fig. 2.

Schematic of the tire model.

where C is corning stiffness of the wheels and fi is the friction
force on the front/rear wheel, which can be obtained by:
ff = μ

B. Tire Model
Note that in the vehicle model (1), the lateral tire force Fy
in the vehicle frame is used in (1c) and (1e) to calculate the
lateral acceleration and yaw rate. In this section, a tire model is
implemented to obtain the Fy , and the schematic drawing of the
tire model is shown in Fig. 2. Denote F̄x,f , F̄y,f , F̄x,r and F̄y,r
as the tire forces in the wheel frame. The following equation
relates the tire force in the vehicle and wheel frames,
Fx,i = F̄x,i cos ui − F̄y,i sin ui

(2a)

Fy,i = F̄x,i sin ui + F̄y,i cos ui ,

(2b)

where uf and ur are the front and rear wheel steering angles,
and i = {f, r} represents the front or rear wheels, respectively.
Since this letter only considers front-wheel steering vehicles, ur
is always set to zero.
A linear tire force model can be used to calculate the lateral
tire force F̄y,f as follows,
F̄y,i = Cfi αi ,

(3)

Lxr mg
Lxf mg
, fr = μ
2(Lxf + Lxr )
2(Lxf + Lxr )

(4)

Note that αi in (3) is the wheel slip angle defined as αi =




arctan(V̄y,i
/V̄x,i
), where V̄y,i
and V̄x,i
are the vehicle corner


velocities in the wheel frame. Note also that V̄y,i
and V̄x,i
can
be calculated using vehicle corner velocities in vehicle frame
(V̄x,i , V̄y,i ) based on following trigonometric relationships:

V̄x,i
= V̄x,i cos ui + V̄y,i sin ui

(5a)


V̄y,i
= −V̄x,i sin ui + V̄y,i cos ui .

(5b)

Vehicle corner velocity in the vehicle frame, i.e. V̄x,i , V̄y,i ,
can be calculated using vehicle longitudinal speed vx and lateral
speed vy at the CG, as follows:
V̄x,f = vx ,

V̄y,f = vy + rLxf

(6a)

V̄x,r = vx ,

V̄y,r = vy − rLxr

(6b)

C. Vehicle Parameter Estimation
The vehicle dynamic model (1) requires several parameters
including wheelbase L = Lxf + Lxr , vehicle moment of inertia

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 03:30:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3550

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

I, and the friction coefficient μ, etc. Some parameters can be
directly found in the CARLA simulator, such as vehicle mass m
and wheelbase, while the rest cannot be directly obtained from
the simulator and need to be estimated offline. The set of parameT

ters that need to be estimated is θ = μ I Lxf Lxr C .
To estimate θ, measurements of the input and state sequences
are collected by running CARLA. Denote the sequence of input
(i.e., steering command) as U and the state sequence as X. For
each estimate θ̂, its fitness function is calculated as follows. First,
substitute θ̂ into (1), and then calculate the response of (1) using
the input U . Denote the response of (1) as X̂. Then the fitness
function of θ̂ can be defined as
fit(θ̂) =

K 




Xi − X̂i  ,

TABLE II
GA SETTING PARAMETERS

1

k=1

Algorithm 1: Genetic Algorithm for Parameter Estimation.
1: Collect input and state sequences (U, X) by running
CARLA;
2: Population initialization
initial θ̂
3: for generation size do
4: a = min fit(θ̂);
Evaluate fit(θ̂) by running (1)
5: if a converge then
6:
Break;
7: else
8:
Generate next population;
crossover
9: end if
10: end for
11: return θ̂

where K is the number of measurements. Therefore, the parameter θ can then be found by solving the following optimization
problem, where L represents the wheelbase.
K 




min fit(θ̂) =
Xi − X̂i 
θ̂

k=1

1

(7a)

s.t. θmin ≤ θ̂ ≤ θmax

(7b)

Lxf + Lxr = L

(7c)

In other words, the offline parameter estimation is then cast
into an offline optimization problem (7). Several optimization
solvers can be used to solve (7). In this letter, genetic algorithm
(GA) [41] is selected due to its robustness and a higher chance of
converging to the global optimum. The GA solver in the Matlab
library is used to solve the optimization problem (7). In the GA,
the genes are μ, I, Lxf , Lxr and C, while θ represents the
chromosome. The crossover is done by randomly choosing the
genes from the parents, and no mutation is applied in the child.
The parameter estimation process is illustrated in Algorithm
1, where Line 1 collects measurement input and state sequence
by running CARLA. Note that after Line 1, the rest of Algorithm
1 will be simulating the bicycle model (1). Line 2 initializes
the genes of individuals (estimate parameters θ̂), and Line 4
evaluates the value of the fitness function for each θ̂. If the
fitness value a is converged, the loop will break, and the optimal
parameters θ̂ are returned at Line 11. If not, individuals with
better fitness values are selected as parents to create the next
generation.
Remark 1: GA used in this letter is to offline estimate the
parameters of the vehicle dynamic model (1)–(6) that can not be
directly obtained from the CARLA simulator. In other words,
we utilized GA on the bicycle model to find the optimal parameters that produce the best match between the bicycle model’s
response and the data collected from CARLA. More specifically,
CARLA is used to generate measurement data, while GA will
use dynamic model (1)–(6) to evaluate the fitness function, as
illustrated in Algorithm 1. Also note that, since GA is running

TABLE III
PARAMETERS FOR VEHICLE DYNAMIC MODEL (1)-(6)

offline, its computation time does not cause any delay in realtime control.
Remark 2: Because the dynamic model (1)–(6) is used by
MPC for short-term prediction, with a typical prediction horizon
less than 50, when calculating the response X̂ and the fitness
function fit(θ̂), the initial state of (1) is reset to the measurement every 50 time steps. In other words, the goal here is to find
a good parameter estimate θ̂ such that model (1)–(6) is accurate
during MPC prediction horizon, while the long-term inaccuracy
is not accounted for by θ̂.
Finally, Table II lists the setting parameters of the GA, and
the list of vehicle parameters, including those estimated by GA,
are given in Table III.
IV. EVENT-TRIGGERED MPC FOR PATH TRACKING
To implement MPC, the bicycle vehicle model (1) can be
discretized using forward Euler [42], as follows.
xt+1 = xt + x˙t Ts ,

(8)

where Ts is the sampling time and xt is the system state
at discrete time t. For MPC-based path tracking control,
at time instance t, a constrained optimal control problem
(OCP) is formulated to find the optimal state sequence Xt =
{xt+1 , xt+2 , . . . , xt+p } and the optimal control sequence Ut =
{ut , ut+1 , . . . , ut+p−1 }, where p is the prediction horizon.
Conventional MPC, also referred to as time-triggered MPC in
this letter, solves an OCP at each sampling time. In other words,

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 03:30:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

3551

Algorithm 2: Event-triggered MPC for AV Path Tracking.

Fig. 3.

Illustration of the calculation of the lateral offset dy .

at each time step t, the following OCP is formulated and solved.
min

Xt ,Ut

J(Xt , Ut )

s.t. xt = x̂t

(9a)
(9b)

System dynamics (8), 1 ≤ k ≤ p

(9c)

umin ≤ ut+k ≤ umax , 0 ≤ k ≤ p − 1

(9d)

Δmin ≤ ut+k − ut+k−1 ≤ Δmax , 0 ≤ k ≤ p − 1
(9e)
In (9b), x̂t denotes the current state feedback, and for (9e),
ut−1 denotes the control action applied at the previous time
step. The cost function J in (9a) and boundary constraints of
steering angle u are discussed in Section V-C. The above OCP
is solved for every sampling time t, and only the first element
in the optimal control sequence Ut is applied to the steering
actuator.
Time-triggered MPC can be computationally heavy since
the OCP (9) needs to be solved at every time step. To address this limitation, event-triggered MPC has been proposed
in literature [17], [21], [23], [25]. Unlike time-triggered MPC,
event-triggered MPC solves the OCP (9) only when an event is
triggered. This letter considers the threshold-based event-trigger
mechanism adopted by [23]. Since the longitudinal velocity is
not controlled by MPC, the lateral offset dy is primarily considered when determining an event, where dy is the closest distance
from vehicle’s current position to the target path. Fig. IV shows
an example of reference points location and current vehicle
location, and the lateral offset dy is calculated by (10),
dy =

|(x2 − x1 )(y1 − py ) − (x1 − px )(y2 − y1 )|

,
(x2 − x1 )2 + (y2 − y1 )2

(10)

where (px , py ) is the vehicle’s current position, and (x1 , y1 ) and
(x2 , y2 ) are the two points in the target path that are closest to
the vehicle’s current position.
Example 1: When the vehicle position is (px , py ) =
(140.3, −54.5), by comparing the paths, the two nearest
path points are (x1 , y1 ) = (140.3, −55.8) and (x2 , y2 ) =
(140.5, −53.8). Therefore, substitute these three points into
(10), and the lateral offset dy is 0.0398 m.

1: Procedure eMPCX̂t , k, Ut1 , Xt1
2: k ← k + 1;
3: e ← computing (11);
4: if e = 1 then
5:
k ← 0;
6:
(Xt , Ut ) ← Solving OCP (9);
7:
u ← Ut (1);
8:
U t1 ← U t ;
9:
X t1 ← X t ;
10: else
11:
u ← Ut1 (k + 1);
12: end if
13: return u, k, Ut1 , Xt1
14: end Procedure

Finally, the event-trigger mechanism is shown as follows,

1
if dy > σ or k > kmax
e=
,
(11)
0
Otherwise
where k is the number of consecutive times that the MPC has not
been triggered, and σ and kmax are calibration parameters that
influence the event-trigger frequency. Note that kmax should be
equal to or less than the prediction horizon p. In other words,
event-triggered MPC solves the OCP (9) only when the vehicle’s
lateral offset is greater than a predefined threshold σ (i.e., dy >
σ) or the previously optimized control sequence Ut1 has been
depleted (i.e., k > kmax ). In either case we have e = 1 and OCP
(9) is solved to determine current control action u. Otherwise
e = 0, and the control action can be determined using the optimal
sequence Ut1 computed during the last event, i.e.,

Solution of (9)
if e = 1
.
(12)
u=
Otherwise
Ut1 (k + 1)
Algorithm 2 summarizes the event-triggered MPC for AV path
tracking control for each sampling time t.
Remark 3: To solve the optimal control problem (9), we use
the MPCTools package and CasADi, which are open-source optimization tools described in [43], [44]. The MPCTools consists
of three components: the estimator, the target calculator, and
the regulator. Each of these components provides an interface to
CasADi solvers. The regulator determines an optimal open-loop
control trajectory from the current state estimate to the targets,
which is used in this letter.
V. CARLA SETUP AND SIMULATION RESULT
A. CARLA Environment
CARLA is a powerful tool for autonomous vehicle simulation [26]. It is open-source, high-fidelity, and can simulate real
urban driving scenarios for AV control design, development,
testing, and validation. CARLA environment provides various
configurations of maps, GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite
System), cameras, and sensors, as well as customizable vehicle
configurations. Compared to other AV simulation platforms,

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 03:30:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3552

Fig. 4. Flow chart for the CARLA simulation. In this framework, the controller
is divided into the longitudinal controller and the lateral controller. The longitudinal controller uses PID to track a certain target speed. The lateral controller
in this letter uses MPC to track a target trajectory.

CARLA has been widely used for testing AV algorithms [45]
since it is open-source and can readily interface with several
control and artificial intelligence libraries.
In this letter, CARLA version 0.9.13 is utilized, and Fig. 4
illustrates the flow chart of the software structure. First of all, the
CARLA framework initializes the environment, which includes
the map, GNSS, sensors, and vehicle. Then the global path
planning module employs the A-star (A∗ ) algorithm [46] based
on the route map network to find the shortest path connecting
the start and destination. During each control loop, the sensors
detect the surrounding condition of the ego vehicle, while GNSS
locates the vehicle position and feeds this information to the
local controller. Meanwhile, CARLA APIs are used to get the
vehicle’s state information such as velocity, acceleration, and
heading angle, which is also fed to the local controller for
longitudinal and lateral control. The local controller consists
of two parts, longitudinal control and lateral control. A PIC
controller is implemented in the longitudinal control module
to track the target speed. In the lateral controller, MPC-based
path tracking is applied to obtain the optimal steering angle to
regulate the lateral offset between the vehicle position and path.
Remark 4: Since the maximum vehicle speed in the simulation is about 30 kph, the force required by tires for longitudinal
and lateral acceleration is much lower than the maximum friction force that the ground can provide. In this case, it is very
common and reasonable to use separate longitudinal and lateral
controllers, since their interference is negligible. Furthermore,
the longitudinal speed can be treated as a measured disturbance
for OCP (9). Therefore, in this letter, we validate event-triggered
MPC for lateral control, while keeping PID for longitudinal
control.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

Fig. 5.

The CARLA reference route used for simulation.

Fig. 6.

Path smoothing with Bezier curve during lane change maneuver.

B. Path Smoothing and Re-Sampling
To make the simulation more realistic, this letter considers
several driving maneuvers including straight lines, turns, and
a lane change (see Fig. 5). However, as shown in Figs. 5 and
6, the reference route returned by the global path planning
module during the lane change maneuver is a straight line
with non-differentiable starting and ending points, which does
not conform to the driving trajectory of a vehicle. Therefore,
a Bezier curve is used to smooth the route during the lane
change maneuver, with the control points being determined by
the following equations,
B(0) = P0

B(1) = P5

(13a)

Ḃ(0) = 5(P1 − P0 )

Ḃ(1) = 5(P5 − P4 )

(13b)

B̈(0) = 20(P0 − 2P1 + P2 )

B̈(1) = 20(P3 − 2P4 + P5 )
(13c)

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 03:30:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

TABLE IV
MPC PARAMETERS

3553

TABLE V
PERFORMANCE IN ENTIRE PATH WITH DIFFERENT CONTROLLERS

where P0 to P5 are coordinates of control points to determine
the Bezier curve. B(0) and B(1) represent the coordinates of
the start point and end point of the Bezier curve, which are set to
be the starting and ending points of the lane change manuever,
respectively. Ḃ(0) and Ḃ(1) are the first order derivatives at
both ends of Bezier curve; B̈(0) and B̈(1) are the second
order derivatives at both ends of Bezier curve. The reference
path smoothed by the Bezier curve is shown in Fig. 6. More
details about Bezier curves and path optimization can be found
in [27].
Furthermore, to obtain the short-term reference path for MPC
to track, the global route generated above needs to be rearranged
because the interval between consecutive waypoints is different.
Therefore, the waypoints on the global route need to be resampled according to current vehicle speed vx and sampling time
Ts . Since MPC relies on short-term prediction, it is reasonable
to assume that vx remains constant throughout the prediction
horizon. Therefore, the waypoints throughout the prediction
horizon are re-sampled so that they are equally distanced from
each other, where the distance is equal to current vehicle speed
vx multiplied by sampling time Ts .

TABLE VI
THE MAXIMUM ERROR UNDER DIFFERENT CONDITIONS (m)

TABLE VII
THE RMSE UNDER DIFFERENT CONDITIONS (m)

TABLE VIII
MPC EVENT-TRIGGER FREQUENCY UNDER DIFFERENT CONDITIONS (%)

C. MPC Setup
Recall that the control objective is to track the vehicle position
according to a reference path. Denote the coordinates of reference waypoints as prx and pry . Then the MPC cost function (for
both time-triggered MPC and event-triggered MPC) is defined
as follows,

JN (Xt , Ut ) =

p 
2


ref 
xt+k (1) − px,t+k 
k=1

+

Qp

p 
p−1
2



ref 
ut+k 2Qu
xt+k (2) − py,t+k  +
Qp

k=1

+

p−1


ut+k − ut+k−1 2Qd

k=0

(14)

k=0

where the first two terms in (14) represent the path tracking
error, the third term penalizes large steering angle, and the last
term reduces control busyness. The parameters Qp , Qu , and Qd
are the weights for the path tracking error, steering efforts, and
control busyness, respectively. Meanwhile, to ensure the maneuvering stability of the vehicle, both actuator bound constraints
and rate constraints are considered, as listed in Table IV, which
also includes other MPC parameters/calibrations.

D. Simulation Analysis
Both AV path tracking controllers based on time-triggered
MPC (denoted as tMPC) and the proposed event-triggered MPC
(denoted as eMPC(σ)) are simulated in the developed environment. Note that we use σ in eMPC(σ) to denote the event-trigger
threshold used in (11). More specifically, three event-trigger
thresholds with σ = 0.01, σ = 0.02, and σ = 0.03 are simulated
and compared. The target vehicle velocity is 10 m/s. Maximum
error, root mean square error (RMSE), and MPC event-trigger
frequency are used to analyze the performance of each controller.
Meanwhile, the path is divided into three sections to analyze
the control performance during different driving maneuvers:
Straight, Lane Change, and Turn. Table V shows the path
tracking performance with different controllers, and Tables VI,
VII, and VIII list the performance in various driving maneuvers.
Moreover, Fig. 7 plots the lateral errors for different controllers.
From Table V it is not surprising to find that the vehicle has
the best tracking performance with tMPC. For the proposed
path tracking controller based on event-triggered MPC, the
maximum error and RMSE are larger than those of tMPC,
due to the fact that fewer real-time optimization problems are
solved. However, these are still well within the acceptable range
(the maximum errors are all less than 0.2 m). Specifically, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 03:30:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3554

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

Fig. 7. Comparison of lateral error for all MPC settings. Lane Change maneuver is between 4.2 s and 7.5 s; Turn maneuvers are between 10.2 s and 19.5 s, and
between 28 s and 35.2 s. All the remaining portions correspond to Straight Line maneuvers.

RMSE for the three event-triggered MPC settings are comparable with that of time-triggered MPC, and the maximum
errors are still acceptable. It is also worth noting that, eMPCbased path tracking controllers experience larger performance
degradation during more dynamic maneuvers such as the Lane
Change. However, the benefit of the proposed event-triggered
MPC-based path tracking controller is also demonstrated in
these results. With a slight degradation of control performance,
event-triggered MPC does reduce the computation significantly,
requiring only 55.21% of computation compared to that of timetriggered MPC. Comparing the tracking performance within
the three event-triggered MPC settings, it is apparent that as
the event-trigger threshold increases, both the maximum error
and RMSE increase, while the MPC trigger frequency decreases. Therefore, the event-trigger threshold σ can be used
as a key calibration to balance between computation and control
performance.
From Tables VI and VII, the tracking performance during
the Straight maneuver is much better than the other two cases,
as also demonstrated by Fig. 7. In Fig. 7, the lane changing
maneuver occurs from 4.2 to 7.5 seconds, the first turn occurs
from 10.2 to 19.5 seconds, and the second turn occurs from
28 to 35.2 seconds. The remaining sections represent Straight
maneuvers. The numerical results show a significant improvement using event-triggered MPC for straight line maneuvers.
With around 50% of computation, event-triggered MPC can
achieve a similar level of maximum error and RMSE compared
to time-triggered MPC. During the Lane Change maneuver
and Turn maneuvers, event-triggered MPC suffers a larger yet
still acceptable control performance degradation, with around
10%–25% of computation reduction.
Remark 5: Note that a same event-trigger threshold σ is
used in each eMPC setting. However, results from Tables VI,
VII, and VIII suggest that a dynamic threshold that provides
maneuver-dependent event-trigger strategy may better balance

control performance and computation. Such adaptive eventtrigger mechanism will remain as a future work.
Remark 6: Another approach to reducing MPC computation
is to simply increase sampling time Ts , so that MPC runs
in a lower sampling frequency. However, this approach will
sometimes result in suboptimal or even unstable control behavior
when the system under control possesses fast dynamics. It is
worth noting that event-triggered MPC is different from simply increasing sampling time Ts in time-triggered MPC. Note
that in Table VIII, the event-trigger frequency changes as the
driving conditions change, resulting in a dynamic and aperiodic
sampling strategy.
VI. CONCLUSION
This letter proposed event-triggered model predictive control
(MPC) for autonomous vehicle path tracking and conducts a
comprehensive simulation investigation based on open-source
CARLA environment. Firstly, a bicycle vehicle model is established, based on which MPC is applied to control the vehicle’s
lateral dynamics. In event-triggered MPC, to determine if a new
optimization is needed, the lateral offset of the vehicle’s current
position from the target path is used. A new optimization is
formulated and solved only if the lateral offset is greater than
a predefined threshold. Simulation results shows that eventtriggered MPC reduces computation load, especially during
straight driving conditions, while maintaining comparable control performance. Specifically, the computation can be reduced
by around 60% on straight paths, 25% on turns, and 20% during
lane changes. In all cases, the root mean square errors with
event-triggered MPC are comparable to that of time-triggered
MPC, and the maximum errors are all less than 0.2 m. When the
threshold increases, the amount of computation and the accuracy
of path-tracking will gradually decrease together. Therefore,
when the accuracy meets the requirements, the computation

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 03:30:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

burden can be reduced by adjusting the event-trigger threshold.
Future work includes investigating adaptive event-trigger mechanisms and validating event-triggered MPC-based path tracking
on real vehicles.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Huang, J. Du, Z. Yang, Z. Zhou, L. Zhang, and H. Chen, “A survey
on trajectory-prediction methods for autonomous driving,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Veh., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 652–674, Sep. 2022.
[2] S. Teng, L. Chen, Y. Ai, Y. Zhou, Z. Xuanyuan, and X. Hu, “Hierarchical
interpretable imitation learning for end-to-end autonomous driving,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 673–683, Jan. 2023.
[3] Z. Zhu, N. Pivaro, S. Gupta, A. Gupta, and M. Canova, “Safe modelbased off-policy reinforcement learning for eco-driving in connected and
automated hybrid electric vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 7, no. 2,
pp. 387–398, Jun. 2022.
[4] D. Cao et al., “Future directions of intelligent vehicles: Potentials, possibilities, and perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 7–10,
Mar. 2022.
[5] B. Paden, M. Čáp, S. Z. Yong, D. Yershov, and E. Frazzoli, “A survey of
motion planning and control techniques for self-driving urban vehicles,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 33–55, Mar. 2016.
[6] F. Gao, Y. Han, S. E. Li, S. Xu, and D. Dang, “Accurate pseudospectral
optimization of nonlinear model predictive control for high-performance
motion planning,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1034–1045,
Feb. 2023.
[7] S. Schaut, E. Arnold, and O. Sawodny, “Predictive thermal management
for an electric vehicle powertrain,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 1957–1970, Feb. 2023.
[8] J. Chen, M. Liang, and X. Ma, “Probabilistic analysis of electric vehicle
energy consumption using MPC speed control and nonlinear battery
model,” in Proc. IEEE Green Tech. Conf., 2021, pp. 181–186.
[9] S. Xiao, X. Ge, Q.-L. Han, and Y. Zhang, “Resource-efficient platooning
control of connected automated vehicles over VANETs,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Veh., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 579–589, Sep. 2022.
[10] F. Tian, Z. Li, F.-Y. Wang, and L. Li, “Parallel learning-based steering
control for autonomous driving,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 8, no. 1,
pp. 379–389, Jan. 2023.
[11] J. B. Rawlings, “Tutorial overview of model predictive control,” IEEE
Control Syst. Mag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 38–52, Jun. 2000.
[12] E. F. Camacho and C. B. Alba, Model Predictive Control. Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2013.
[13] A. Bemporad, F. Borrelli, and M. Morari, “Model predictive control based
on linear programming the explicit solution,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control,
vol. 47, no. 12, pp. 1974–1985, Dec. 2002.
[14] M. Donkers, W. Heemels, D. Bernardini, A. Bemporad, and V. Shneer,
“Stability analysis of stochastic networked control systems,” Automatica,
vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 917–925, 2012.
[15] H. Chen and F. Allgöwer, “A quasi-infinite horizon nonlinear model
predictive control scheme with guaranteed stability,” Automatica, vol. 34,
no. 10, pp. 1205–1217, 1998.
[16] D. Bernardini and A. Bemporad, “Energy-aware robust model predictive
control based on noisy wireless sensors,” Automatica, vol. 48, no. 1,
pp. 36–44, 2012.
[17] F. D. Brunner, W. P. M. H. Heemels, and F. Allgöwer, “Robust eventtriggered MPC with guaranteed asymptotic bound and average sampling
rate,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 62, no. 11, pp. 5694–5709,
Nov. 2017.
[18] Y. Wang et al., “An event-triggered scheme for state estimation of preceding vehicles under connected vehicle environment,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Veh., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 583–593, Jan. 2023.
[19] H. Li and Y. Shi, “Event-triggered robust model predictive control
of continuous-time nonlinear systems,” Automatica, vol. 50, no. 5,
pp. 1507–1513, 2014.
[20] R. Badawi and J. Chen, “Performance evaluation of event-triggered model
predictive control for boost converter,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Power Propulsion Conf., 2022, pp. 1–6.
[21] C. Liu, H. Li, Y. Shi, and D. Xu, “Codesign of event trigger and feedback
policy in robust model predictive control,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control,
vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 302–309, Jan. 2020.
[22] S. Huang and J. Chen, “Event-triggered model predictive control for
autonomous vehicle with rear steering,” SAE Tech. World Congress, Paper
2022-01-0877, 2022.

3555

[23] J. Chen and Z. Yi, “Comparison of event-triggered model predictive
control for autonomous vehicle path tracking,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Control
Technol. Appl., 2021, pp. 808–813.
[24] H. Li, W. Yan, and Y. Shi, “Triggering and control codesign in selftriggered model predictive control of constrained systems: With guaranteed performance,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 63, no. 11,
pp. 4008–4015, Nov. 2018.
[25] J. Chen, X. Meng, and Z. Li, “Reinforcement learning-based eventtriggered model predictive control for autonomous vehicle path following,”
in Proc. IEEE Amer. Control Conf., 2022, pp. 3342–3347.
[26] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun, “CARLA:
An open urban driving simulator,” in Proc. Conf. Robot Learn., 2017,
pp. 1–16.
[27] R. Lattarulo, L. González, E. Martí, J. Matute, M. Marcano, and J. Pérez,
“Urban motion planning framework based on N-bézier curves considering
comfort and safety,” J. Adv. Transp., vol. 2018, pp. 1–13, 2018.
[28] J. Kong, M. Pfeiffer, G. Schildbach, and F. Borrelli, “Kinematic and
dynamic vehicle models for autonomous driving control design,” in Proc.
IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp., 2015, pp. 1094–1099.
[29] P. Falcone, M. Tufo, F. Borrelli, J. Asgari, and H. E. Tseng, “A linear
time varying model predictive control approach to the integrated vehicle
dynamics control problem in autonomous systems,” in Proc. IEEE 46th
Conf. Decis. Control, 2007, pp. 2980–2985.
[30] S. Di Cairano, H. E. Tseng, D. Bernardini, and A. Bemporad, “Vehicle
yaw stability control by coordinated active front steering and differential
braking in the tire sideslip angles domain,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst.
Technol., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1236–1248, Jul. 2013.
[31] F. Ma et al., “Trajectory planning and tracking for four-wheel-steering
autonomous vehicle with V2V communication,” SAE World Congress,
Tech. Paper 2020-01-0114, 2020.
[32] R. Yu, H. Guo, Z. Sun, and H. Chen, “MPC-based regional path tracking
controller design for autonomous ground vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Syst., Man, Cybern., 2015, pp. 2510–2515.
[33] H. Yang, Q. Li, Z. Zuo, and H. Zhao, “Event-triggered model predictive control for multi-vehicle systems with collision avoidance and
obstacle avoidance,” Int. J. Robust Nonlinear Control, vol. 31, no. 11,
pp. 5476–5494, 2021.
[34] J. Liu, Z. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Event-triggered vehicle-following control
for connected and automated vehicles under nonideal vehicle-to-vehicle
communications,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp., 2021, pp. 342–347.
[35] T. Wakasa, K. Sawada, and S. Shin, “Event-triggered switched pinning
control for merging or splitting vehicle platoons,” IFAC-PapersOnLine,
vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 15134–15139, 2020.
[36] N. T. Hung, A. M. Pascoal, and T. A. Johansen, “Cooperative path following of constrained autonomous vehicles with model predictive control
and event-triggered communications,” Int. J. Robust Nonlinear Control,
vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 2644–2670, 2020.
[37] N. T. Hung and A.M. Pascoal, “Cooperative path following of autonomous
vehicles with model predictive control and event triggered communications,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 51, no. 20, pp. 562–567, 2018.
[38] Q. Han, G. Cheng, H. Yang, and Z. Zuo, “Bandwidth-aware transmission
scheduling and event-triggered distributed MPC for vehicle platoons,” in
Proc. IEEE 41st Chin. Control Conf., 2022, pp. 5532–5538.
[39] K. Zou, Y. Cai, L. Chen, and X. Sun, “Event-triggered nonlinear
model predictive control for trajectory tracking of unmanned vehicles,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Engineers, Part D: J. Automobile Eng., 2021,
Art. no. 0954407021992165.
[40] R. Rajamani, Vehicle Dynamics and Control. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2011.
[41] D. E. Golberg, “Genetic algorithms in search, optimization, and machine
learning,” Addion Wesley Professional, 1989.
[42] J. B. Rawlings, D. Q. Mayne, and M. Diehl, Model Predictive Control:
Theory, Computation, and Design. Madison, WI, USA: Nob Hill Publishing Madison, 2017.
[43] J. Rawlings, “Model predictive control (MPC) tools package,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://sites.engineering.ucsb.edu/jbraw/software.html
[44] J. A. E. Andersson, J. Gillis, G. Horn, J. B. Rawlings, and M. Diehl,
“CasADi–A software framework for nonlinear optimization and optimal control,” Math. Program. Comput., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–36,
2019.
[45] G. Li, Z. Ji, S. Li, X. Luo, and X. Qu, “Driver behavioral cloning for route
following in autonomous vehicles using task knowledge distillation,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1025–1033, Feb. 2023.
[46] R. Dechter and J. Pearl, “Generalized best-first search strategies and the
optimality of A∗ ,” J. ACM, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 505–536, 1985.

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 30,2026 at 03:30:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

