3748

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 4, APRIL 2020

A Universal and Reconfigurable Stability Control
Methodology for Articulated Vehicles
With Any Configurations
Yubiao Zhang , Amir Khajepour , and Mansour Ataei

Abstract—To meet with many different transportation needs,
it comes in a rich diversity and variety of articulated vehicles.
Vehicle combinations are seen in different axle configurations,
number of articulations, powertrain, active actuation systems, etc.
This research is, therefore, motivated to develop a model-based
control system in a universal and reconfigurable fashion to any
articulated vehicles stability control. To achieve its universality
and reconfigurability, we introduce a hierarchical (two-layer) control system. Namely, the high layer formulates a model predictive
control (MPC) tracking problem to generate corrective Center of
Gravity (C.G.) forces/moment. The lower-level controller is formulated as Control Allocation (CA) algorithm to regulate steering
or torque (brake) at each wheel optimally and reconfigurable as
to meet high-level calculations. Real-time constraints, i.e. actuator
limits, tire capacity, and actuator failure are discussed. Diverse
applications are presented that the universal and reconfigurable
methodology is handy, capable and effective on stability control
while applying to various vehicle configurations and objectives.
Index Terms—Articulated vehicles, control allocation,
integrated vehicle stability, model predictive control, universal
and reconfigurable control.

transported with just one driver. In a public transport system,
buses have been playing a significant role with their advantageous features in carrying capacity, transport productivity and
reduction of transport costs [3]. Buses have more than two axles
usually three (known as a tri-axle bus). Extra axles are usually
added for legal weight restriction reasons, or usually we can see
using articulation to implement trailer buses.
The popularity of such vehicles, however, garnered increased
public attention to safety problems. Annually, approximately
500,000 accidents involving trucks or buses occur in U.S. Of
the approximately 415,000 crashes involving large trucks in
2016, there were 4440 fatal crashes and estimated 119,000
injury crashes [4], [5]. Worse yet, the majority of accidents
with heavy trucks involved are trucks against passenger cars,
where the severity is much worse for the passenger car due to its
vulnerability. Nevertheless, nowadays, only a minority of these
commercial vehicles are equipped with stability control systems.
B. Diversity, Challenges and Attempts

I. INTRODUCTION
N ORDER to transport a larger volume of freights or passengers via a relatively fixed infrastructure, one way to increase
transportation efficiency is to employ longer vehicles with more
axles or multiple articulated units [1], [2]. These vehicles are
used most often in trucks, tractor-trailers, coaches/uses, and less
frequently on passenger cars.

I

A. Background
Articulated multi-axle vehicles, e.g., trucks, are the main
transportation means of goods all around the world. More than
80% of inland freight volume is transported by road vehicles
today. Each year, road transport carries 6,000 billion tonnekilometres of goods in the EU, USA, CIS, China, and Japan
alone. In the concept of ‘bigger is better,’ the bigger the vehicle
within a practical limitation, the more payload that can be
Manuscript received February 26, 2019; revised November 1, 2019; accepted
February 5, 2020. Date of publication February 11, 2020; date of current version
April 16, 2020. The review of this article was coordinated by Dr. A. Heydari.
(Corresponding author: Yubiao Zhang.)
The authors are with the Department of Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada (e-mail:
gary.zhang@uwaterloo.ca; a.khajepour@uwaterloo.ca; mataei@uwaterloo.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2020.2973082

Articulated vehicles differ from the passenger car quite a lot
and it makes a big challenge for dynamics controls. One of them
is to design a controller that applies to diverse configurations
of these vehicles. Distinctive configurations might be seen in
several dimensions. 1) Axle/articulation configuration. To meet
many different transportation purposes, a wide range of combinations exists. There are vehicles with one unit of multiple axles
or multiple articulated units where each unit could be different.
2) Powertrain/steering configuration. The powertrain of a vehicle describes the main components that in which way it generates
power and how it delivers to the road surface. Depending on the
needs, there are various drive modes and steer modes, seen in [6].
3) Active actuators configuration. Active actuators determine the
active control strategy in lower level implementation. Common
actuators are: a) active torque differential, including torque
vectoring and differential braking [7], [8]. b) active steering
systems [9]–[11]; c) (semi)active suspension systems, including
anti-roll bar [12]–[14]; Considering attributes such as physical
complexity and cost, active actuators configurations vary from
vehicle to vehicle.
Another challenge comes from the complex dynamics characteristics. Multi-axle vehicles are usually characterized by a
high wheelbase to track ratio, a high center of gravity (CG), and
uneven weight distribution between axles, prone to instability or

0018-9545 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 17,2026 at 02:39:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: UNIVERSAL AND RECONFIGURABLE STABILITY CONTROL METHODOLOGY

even roll over. Especially, the existence of articulation makes it
complex while developing the dynamics modeling and control
system. Compared to passenger cars, more control objectives
come up, for instance, trailer sway, jackknife, off-tracking,
rearward amplification. These objectives have to be prioritized
considering the vehicle characteristics and application context.
An ideal controller should be inclusive yet reconfigurable and
selective to these stability objectives.
Although most work focus on two-axle vehicles, the state of
the art for control strategies/concepts in literature inspire us go
further. In [15], it well reviewed Integrated Vehicle Dynamics
Control (IVDC) architectures, that are differentiated as centralized, supervisory, hierarchical, and coordinated control. Among
them, research in integrated vehicle dynamics control( [8], [16]),
and reconfigurable control using optimal control techniques
([17], [18]) are very active. For instance, [16] proposed unified
chassis control(UCC) strategy for improving agility, maneuverability, and vehicle lateral stability by the integration of active
steering and differential braking. A coordinated and reconfigurable vehicle dynamics control system in [17] is presented by
high-level sliding mode control to achieve generalize forces,
and distributed to the slip and slip angle of each tire by control
allocation (CA)in a lower-level controller. In [18], a Holistic
Corner Control (HCC) strategy is introduced, in which provides
real-time vehicle stability control while minimizing tire forces
and control efforts by formulating a quadratic programming
optimization. More extended works in in [19] proposed a reconfigurable modelling and control approach that applied to an
SUV with different types and combinations of control actuation.
C. Contributions and Novelties
Under the challenges of configuration diversity, multiple objectives, and actuation redundancy in articulated vehicles, the
main contribution as well as the core goal of this paper is to
develop a universal and reconfigurable methodology that could
apply to any configurations of these vehicles for dynamics
control. The reconfigurable modeling and control framework
has been introduced and effectively applied to any multi-axle
(non-articulated) vehicles, reported in [20], [21], nevertheless
articulated vehicles are excluded. Differentiating from the previous work, this framework introduced an extended modeling
process, a newly designed controller and very different vehicle
cases study in application part. Leveraging this methodology,
there is no need to reformulate the control problem when a new
vehicle with new configurations comes. One could just set the
defined ‘Boolean Matrix’ values based on vehicle configuration
and do the minor tuning, a new and ad-hoc controller will be
formulated. It is hoped that this methodology will provide a
new perspective on articulated vehicle dynamics control and aid
us all in implementing many different active systems.
The paper is structured as follows. Section II briefly describes
the framework of reconfigurable modeling which serves for
model-based controller design. Section III outlines the potential
control objectives in yaw and roll planes. Section IV formulates
the reconfigurable controller from prediction model to high-level
and lower-level schemes, and discusses real-time constraints.

Fig. 1.

3749

From a single unit to articulated multi-unit vehicle.

Section V comes to four cases with different configurations
of axle, powertrain, active actuator and different emphasis on
control purposes. Section VI concludes the paper along with
recommendations and future work.
II. DYNAMICS AND CONTROL-ORIENTED MODELING
A. Philosophy of Reconfigurable Modeling
The reconfigurable modeling to any vehicles is originally
elaborated in [20], where details, e.g. derivation process and
symbols/nomenclature are well explained. It should be mentioned that vehicle unit configured with 2 to 4 axles are only
reported there for the sake of demonstrating simplicity. It finalizes ‘One Formulation’ that units any multi-axle vehicles, no
matter it is articulated or not. For the convenience of developing
the controller, the modeling process is briefly introduced here.
In the modeling process, the vehicle dynamics is firstly derived from the tire forces to corner forces. Next, all the forces of
the tires are equalized to the CG of the vehicle, which will result
in CG forces/moment. At last, treating the body as a point mass,
the desired dynamics equations are formulated. We novelly
defined ‘Actuator Boolean Matrix’ to determine the availability
(or configuration) of the active actuation and ‘Axle Boolean
Matrix,’ the availability (or configuration) of axles, namely, the
axle’s quantity. How are articulated multi-unit vehicles then
modeled? The benefits of ‘reconfigurable modeling process of a
single vehicle unit’ is taken. In Fig. 1, the vehicle is articulated
with two arbitrary units by a physical articulation. Following
this intuition, the model can be formulated as a two vehicle
units dynamics modeling developed, along with corresponding
dynamics/kinematic constraints at articulation point. The ‘Articulation Boolean Matrix’ is defined to judge the availability of
the articulation, namely, the vehicle is articulated or not.
B. A Single Unit Vehicle
To establish the modeling formulation of articulated vehicles,
we start from the reconfigurable modeling of a single unit
vehicle. Neglecting the effect of camber angles, it is assumed the
vehicle equips with two basic actuators at each corner, which are
driving/braking and steering. The relationship of corner forces
and local(tire) forces including the actuator configuration is
expressed as matrix form,
Fc = Lw (f + Tw Δf ) , ∈ R16×1

(1)

where we defined corner force vector Fc is the result of the
normalized tire force vector f /Δf with respect to x and y axis.

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 17,2026 at 02:39:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3750

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 4, APRIL 2020

Vector f includes each tire’s longitudianal and lateral force while
Δf suggests the augmenting forces on the local forces applied
by the active controller. Lw is the mapping matrix. Tw is defined
as the ‘Actuator Boolean Matrix,’ where configures the active
actuators. Concretely, this matrix is changeable based upon
what actuation system the vehicle has, for example, differential
braking or active steering [20].
To map each wheel’s corner forces to CG location, the total
longitudinal force, total lateral force and total moment at CG are
expressed as,
FCG = Lc Tc Fc , ∈ R3×1

(2)

where Lc is the mapping matrix from corner forces to CG forces.
As a result, the force vector at CG (x-y plane) is defined that
FCG = [Fx Fy Mz ]T , wherein Fx is the total CG longitudinal
force; Fy , the total CG lateral force; Mz , the total CG yaw
moment;. Tc is defined as the ‘Axle Boolean Matrix,’ which
determines the availability of axles, i.e. how many axles the
vehicle has.
Coupling 4 degree-of-freedom, i.e., the longitudinal, lateral,
yaw, and roll motion, the linearized vehicle motion can be
described as a state space form with the input of CG forces [20],
ẋ = Ax + BFCG

(3)

where the state x = [vx vy r φ φ̇]T that represents the
longtidunal speed (vx ), lateral speed (vy ), yaw rate(r), and roll
angle/ roll rate (φ/φ̇).
In this research, the brush tire model is used to calculate the
lateral tire force. For the computation’s sake, it is linearized
at the slip angle operating point considering the vertical load
and road condition [22], [23]. Given a nonlinear explicit tire
model, we take the zeroth and first-order terms of its Taylor
expansion to achieve an affine model. The longitudinal tire force
is proportional to the wheel torque assuming small slip ratios.
From the single-track model, the tire slip angles can be expressed
as vehicle state x and steering angle. Given vehicle state x,
driver input vector w, i.e torque and steering inputs, and active
controller input u, we write the linearized tire (local) forces in
matrix form,
f = Atire x + B tire w + dtire

(4)

Δf = B tire u

(5)

where the inputs vector are defined as:

T

w = w1T w2T · · · w8T , wi = Qi

u = uT
1

uT
2

···

uT
8

T


, ui = ΔQi

δi

T

Δδi

;

T

.

Symbol Q/δ denotes torque (driving or braking) and steering
angle.
Combining the derived formulation of tires forces and vehicle
dynamics in (1)-(5), the whole vehicle model yields the following expression as a standard state-space form in a continuous
time,
ẋ = Ac x + Bc v + Gc w + dc

(6)

Fig. 2.

Separated units of an articulated vehicle.

T

where v = ΔFx ΔFy ΔMz is the virtual corrective CG
forces to be calculated from the high-level controller. We name
(6) as the ‘reconfigurable vehicle model.’ Given any multi-axle
vehicles (one-unit), there is no need to start over again to model
for every vehicle. It is readily achieved by easily configuring the
‘Axle Boolean Matrix Tc ’ and ‘Actuator Boolean Matrix Tw .’
C. Articulated Multi-Unit Vehicles
Articulated vehicles dynamics is complex due to the coupled constraints at articulation. Many tried to model it directly
through differential equations and complex transformations and
items elimination. Our idea is simple and straightforward. Intuitively, the dynamics of articulated vehicles(one articulation)
is ‘dynamics of two separate units + constraints at hitch point.’
Following the idea, now the modeling is moving from a single
vehicle unit to articulated vehicle. Taking the tractor-trailer in
Fig. 2 as an example, the articulated vehicle has 6 DoFs, where
the tractor unit has the freedom to go forward, side-slip, yaw,
and roll, while the trailer has the freedom to yaw relative to the
tractor and to roll.
Tractor/Trailer Dynamics: Following the same method of
linearization on one unit dynamics formulation (3), we separate
two units and express as,
n
+ C n Fhn ; (n = t, i)
ẋn = An xn + B n FCG

(7)

where parameters or variables with superscript t denotes to the
tractor, and i to the trailer. The only difference shown here is the
force term C n Fhn due to the existence of the articulation, Fht /Fhi
denotes the hitch force vector with respect to the tractor/trailer
while decoupling two units.
Articulation Constraints: Two groups of constraints are suggested at articulation point. The kinematic constraint, namely,
the velocities (vxi , vyi ) at the CG of the trailer can be written with
respect to the velocities at the CG of the tractor (vxt , vyt ) and the
articulation angle (λ),
vxi = vxt cos λ + (v t − lht rt ) sin λ

(8)

vyi = −vxt sin λ + (vyt − lht rt ) cos λ − lhi ri

(9)

where lht /lhi is the distance between the articulation point and
the CG of the tractor/trailer.
The dynamics constraint, namely, the relationship of the longitudinal and lateral force between the tractor and trailer at the
articulation is written as,
t
i
i
= −Fx,h
cos λ − Fy,h
sin λ
Fx,h

(10)

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 17,2026 at 02:39:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: UNIVERSAL AND RECONFIGURABLE STABILITY CONTROL METHODOLOGY

TABLE I
THE RULE OF ARTICULATED VEHICLES MODEL

t
i
i
Fy,h
= Fx,h
sin λ − Fy,h
cos λ

(11)

t
And the interaction yaw moment (Mz,h
) and roll moment
t
(Mx,h ) at articulation yield,
t
i
= −Mz,h
= Kλ λ + Cλ λ̇
Mz,h

(12)

t
i
= −Mx,h
= Kt,i (φt − φi )
Mx,h

(13)

t,i
t,i
where Kλ,h
and Cλ,h
are the articulation angle stiffness coeffit,i
cient and damping coefficient,and Kφ,h
is the roll stiffness of
articulation point to calculate the roll moment due to the roll
angle difference between two units.
Model Finalization: The constraints of the moment at articulation point and kinematic relationships are as demonstrated
from (8) to (13). By summarizing above equations, the matrix
form with the equality constraints of the articulated vehicle is
written as,

s.s form. ẋ = Ax + BFCG + Tε (CFH )
2 units

t
FH
= Lt−i FH i
v i = vxt cos λ + (v t − lht rt ) sin λ
s. t. xi
vy = −vxt sin λ + (vyt − lht rt ) cos λ − lhi ri
λ̇ = ri − rt

desired rollover index. Readers can find the detailed derivation in
listed literature. Although not studied in this paper, longitudinal
dynamics is included in the modelling. Desired longitudinal
speed is set by the driver or active controller, for instance,
in adaptive cruise control/emergency braking control. Vehicle
lateral speed (or slip angle) is unavoidable in cornering. The
controller only articulates the lateral speed while large body slip
occurs [24]. Desired lateral speed (vyd ) is hence defined as a
envelop control, which reduces frequent control activation and
energy consumption. The desired yaw rate (rd ) is obtained from
interpreting the driver’s intention. [20] reports how to derive the
desired yaw rate for multi-axle vehicles. Rollover index (RI) is a
common coefficient that reflects the vehicle lateral load transfer.
In this research, un-tripped rollover is considered and a general
RI is used for vehicle rollover control [25]. Alternatively, [26],
[27] proposed the zero-moment point (ZMP) based on a simplified kinematic model of the vehicle while conventional approaches require tyre forces measurement/estimation. The ZMP
is analyzed and validated across several vehicle configurations
and this would be beneficial when limited sensors are equipped
in the vehicle. Similar to lateral stability, the desired rollover
index (RId ) is only tracked when exceeding a defined threshold
(RImax ) [28].
Generally, for articulated 2-unit vehicles (tractor-trailer), we
control the articulation angle instead of the trailer yaw rate, to
prevent instability such as trailer sway and jackknife. The desired
articulation angle is developed by considering the steady-state
handling behavior [29]. By referring to the articulation angle
gain with respect to the front steer angle, it is achieved as,

(14)

where,
 




xt
At
Bt
0(5×5)
0(5×5)
x = i ,A =
,B =
,
x
0(5×5)
Ai
0(5×5)
Bi






FCG t
FH t
Ct
0(5×3)
FCG =
,C =
, FH =
,
FCG i
0(5×3)
Ct
FH i
Tε is defined as ‘Articulation Boolean Matrix’ in Table I to
determine the availability of the articulation, i.e whether the
vehicle is articulated or not. Note that, by following the modeling
approach, we could readily extend the one-articulation vehicle
to any number of articulations vehicles. Each unit of the vehicle
is allowed to allocate any axles, and each axle is allowed to
steer or drive/brake independently. Readers can find the work of
extension to any articulated n-unit vehicles in [20].
III. STABILITY CONTROL OBJECTIVES
Vehicle stability references (or desired states) are well studied
from vehicle fundamental dynamics, which are not repeated
here. As the control-oriented model includes 4 DoF of each
unit, the desired vehicle response consists of the desired longitudinal speed, desired yaw rate, desired lateral speed, and

3751

λd =

i
v2
(Li + lht ) + Kus
δ
t
t
2
L + Kus v

(15)

t
is the understeer coefficient of the tractor unit while
where Kus
i
Kus , that of the trailer unit. Lt /Li is tractor/trailer wheelbase.
To make sure both units are directional stable, both units are
t
i
and Kus
are designed to be very
designed to be understeer. Kus
small positive. They are calculated by the axle cornering stiffness
and its weight distribution.

IV. UNIVERSAL CONTROLLER DESIGN
To achieve the universality, reconfigurability, and integratability of the controller, a two-layer control structure was developed,
illustrated in Fig. 3, It could apply to any multi-axle vehicles
with any control objectives in yaw and roll dynamics plane.
However, depending on a specific application, part of the CG
corrective forces, e.g. only the CG corrective yaw moment, and
selected objectives may be adopted. The objective of control
strategy falls into two layers: At each time step, the high-level
controller is to ensure the vehicle follows the state references,
and guarantees stability and safety by solving the following MPC
problem:
min tracking error + CG corrections + oscillation
s.t.

vehicle dynamics model
input boundary
feasibility and stability

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 17,2026 at 02:39:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3752

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 4, APRIL 2020

A complete structure of controller.

Once the optimal CG corrections are computed, lower level
controller allocates the wheel steering, drive/braking torque
optimal by solving the following control allocation problem:
min

mapping error + control eﬀorts

s.t.

input boundary

Basically, the proposed controller framework consists of
four parts, namely, the reference model module, high-level
controller, lower-level controller, and real-time constraints,
whereas the estimation module is out of the paper’s scope.
The driver’s steering and drive/brake torque commands are
passed to the vehicle. Based on that, the desired dynamics
states (yd ) are calculated together with other information. The
high-level controller uses a MPC algorithm to optimal corrective CG forces (ΔFx , ΔFy , ΔMz ) of each unit by minimizing the errors between the reference sequences and sequences predicted in the control horizon using current state
and driver inputs. These control inputs are virtual but universal
to any vehicles. Now feeding into the lower-level controller,
the augmented torque or braking (ΔQ1 , ΔQ2 , . . . , ΔQi ) or/and
steering (Δδ1 , Δδ2 , . . . , Δδi ) are optimally distributed by solving a constrained quadratic problem at each time step. Real
time constraints bound the final control inputs to violate not,
such as actuator limits, tire capacity. Not only, the lowerlevel control allocation provides optimal control actions, but
also gives freedom and reconfigurability for different actuation
systems.
A. Prediction Model
The prediction model’s accuracy and complexity have a critical impact on the closed-loop optimization, i.e. computational
cost and performance. The accuracy of this paper is guaranteed
using the nonlinear tire model meanwhile complexity is considered by linearizing the body dynamics and tire operating point.
Regarding non-articulated vehicles, the prediction model is explicitly given in (6). But the final model of articulated vehicles is
formulated in an indirect manner (14), which has difficulties to

serve as a standard prediction model. A reformation is therefore
introduced.
For a further simplification, assuming the articulation angle
λ is small, the kinematic relationships and force constraints of
the articulation point is linearized to rewrite (14) as,
s.s form.

ẋ = Ax + BFCG + CFH

s.t.

M(2×10) ẋ = P(2×10) x
N(6×8) FH = Q(6×10)

2 units

(16)

where,


1
M(2×10) =
0

0
and P(2×10) =
0

0
1

0
−lht

0
0

0
0

−1 0
0 −1

0
−lhi

0
0

0
−vxt

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
vxt


0 0
,
0 0

0
.
0

In the matrix N(6×8) , elements N1,1 , N1,5 , N2,2 , N2,5 , N3,3 ,
N3,7 , N4,4 , N4,8 , N5,4 , N6,8 are equal to 1 and the rests are zeros.
In the matrix Q(6×10) , elements Q6,5 and Q6,10 equal to −Kt−i
t
and Kt−i , respectively, and the rests are zeros. FH = [Fx,h
t
t
t
i
i
i
i
T
Fy,h Mz,h Mx,h Fx,h Fy,h Mz,h Mx,h ]
represents
the forces at the hitch point. The first constraint in (16) means
there are two independent linear algebraic equations in terms
of ẋ and x while the second one means six independent linear
algebraic equations in terms of FH t and FH i . Multiply M to
both sides of ( 16), it gives,
M ẋ = M Ax + M BFCG + M CFH

(17)

Combining ( 17) with the constraint M ẋ = P x, by taking the
right-hand side of both equation, it gives,
M Ax + M BFCG + M CFH = P x
⇒ M CFH = (P − M A)x − M BFCG

(18)

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 17,2026 at 02:39:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: UNIVERSAL AND RECONFIGURABLE STABILITY CONTROL METHODOLOGY

Next, integrating the constraint N(6×8) FH = Q(6×10) in one
matrix operation form, it gives,




(N6×8)
Q(6×10) x
FH =
(M C)(2×8)
((P − M A)x − M BFCG )(2×1)
(19)
To achieve a form that connects the FH and state variables x
and FCG , here a trick of matrix transform is used, it holds that,
 


Q(6×10) x
Q(6×10)
=
x
((P − M A)x − M BFCG )(2×1)
(P − M A)


0(6×6)
−
FCG (20)
MB
Since the matrix associated with FH holds full rank, FH can be
expressed in terms of x and FCG ,
−1 


N(6×8)
Q(6×10)
FH =
x
(M C)(2×8)
(P − M A)






J

N(6×8)
−
(M C)(2×8)


J

−1 

K1


0(6×6)
FCG
MB
 

(21)

K2

Substituting it back to ( 16), the state-space formulations
becomes,
ẋ = Ax + BFCG + C(JK1 x − JK2 FCG )
⇒ ẋ = (A + CJK1 )x + (B − CJK2 )FCG
T

(22)

T

t
i
FCG
]T . Applying the same procedure
where FCG = [FCG
where FCG is derived from a single vehicle unit, FCG can
be expressed in terms of tire model along with vehicle states
and driver inputs. Eventually, it will achieve the full model
configuration similar with (6).

B. High-Level MPC
The high-level MPC is designed to compute the corrective CG
forces for stability’s sake. MPC naturally handles multivariable
systems without additional design complexity, thus simplifying
the controller development with multivariables. Furthermore,
states and actuator constraints are easily formulated into the
optimization problem. Desired references of the lateral speed,
the yaw rate, and articulation angle and the rollover index are
generated and updated from the reference module,
yd = vxt d vyt d rdt RIdt λd RIdi

T

(23)

Note that, (23) is the full state of a two-unit vehicle. When it
comes to real implementation, the reference vector and prediction model are simplified as to meet the desired objectives. For
instance, a yaw-plane dynamics control for tractor-trailer gives
yd = [vyt d rdt λd ]T . In an MPC scheme, the model of the plant
is used to predict the future evolution of the system, and the
controller action sequence is achieved by repeatedly solving

3753

finite time optimal control problems in a receding horizon
fashion [30]. The optimization is formulated as a constrained
quadratic program.
The linear-time-varying(LTV) model is discretized using the
Euler method (Zero Order Holder) with sampling period Ts ,
x(k + 1) = Ad x(k) + Bd v(k) + Gd w(k) + dd (k)
y(k) = Cd x(k)

(24)
(25)

where
the
current
control
vector
v(k) =
[ΔFxt ΔFyt ΔMzt ΔFxi ΔFyi ΔMzi ]T . y(k) is the defined
output used to track references. We define the cost function in
a finte horizon Np as,
Np −1

Np
2

vt+k,t 2R

yt+k,t − yd t+k,t Q +

J(x(t), Vt ) =
k=1

k=0

+ vt+k,t − vt+k−1,t 2S

(26)

where Vt = [vt,t , · · · vt+Np −1,t ]T ∈ R6Np ×1 , represents the
optimization sequence at time t. Index t + k, t denotes the
predicted value at k steps ahead of the current time t. The
first term in (26) is the tracking error of the references. The
second term is the prospective CG forces and minimizes the
control efforts. The third term is optional and enforces proximity
to the previous step to prevent oscillation in control actions.
The positive semi-definite Q, R and S are weighting matrices
that reflect the importance of these terms in the cost function.
Alghouth not the focus of this paper, it is worthy to mention
here, regarding vehicle stability objectives, they can be prioritized by regulating the corresponding weights of Q. Generally,
priority from high to lower should be, rollover prevention >
anti-excessive sideslip>yaw rate tracking. By making certain
rules, one could achieve the objective prioritization [31]. At
each time step the following finite horizon (Np ) optimal control
problem is solved on-line,
min

J(x(t), Vt )

s.t.

x(k + 1) = Ad x(k) + Bd v(k) + Gd w(k) + dd (k)
y(k) = Cd x(k)
ymin ≤ yk,t ≤ ymax
vmin ≤ vk,t ≤ vmax
vk,t = vk−1,t + Δvk,t

Vt

yt+Np −1,t − yd t+Np −1,t
k = t, . . . , t + Np − 1

2

Q

2

+ ut+Np −1,t R ≤ γ
(27)

Iteration Algorithm:
1. Acquire the new state x(t), driver input w(t), reference
state yd (t);
2. Solve the QP optimization problem (27);
3. Apply v(t) = v(t + 0, t)
4. t ← t + 1. Go to 1.
Remark: The second last constraint in (27) refers to the terminal constraint to guarantee the stability the LTV MPC scheme.
Detailed work could be found in [32]. The Batch approach
is used to formulate the problem as a standard QP problem.
The objective function can be expressed as a function of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 17,2026 at 02:39:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3754

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 4, APRIL 2020

initial state x0,t and sequences of reference, driver input. The
solver, qpOASES, based on a structure-exploiting active-set
method, provides fast and reliable solutions and is used in this
research [33]. The corrective control vector should be bounded
by the maximum CG forces/moment a specific vehicle can generate. The high-level controller hence completes the calculation
of optimal corrective GG forces.
C. Lower-Level Control Allocation
In this section, calculations by high-level MPC are applied
through corner modular, i.e. drive/braking and steering. Articulated vehicles are usually over-actuated mechanical systems, i.e.
brake system in more than two wheels; active steering system.
The lower-level controller should be able to handle redundancy
and various configuration of active actuators. We use the technique of Control Allocation (CA) to cope with such redundant
actuation systems [17], [34]. As a result, CA offers an optimal
distribution on actuator commands, meanwhile minimization of
the CG corrective forces errors.
To achieve a dynamics stability, the requested corrective CG
forces calculated by the high-level MPC are denoted by,
T

v ∗ = ΔFxt∗ ΔFyt∗ ΔMzt∗ ΔFxi∗ ΔFyi∗ ΔMzi∗
(28)
Using the mappings of aforementioned modeling, the actual CG
forces generated by lower-level CA are denoted by,
T

v = ΔFxt ΔFyt ΔMzt ΔFxi ΔFyi ΔMzi = Bp u
(29)
where Bp = Lc Tc Lw Tw B1 , is the control effectiveness matrix
(or mapping matrix), that connects all the possible actuator
configurations of the vehicle. That is why CA offers the great
convenience to adapt different actuation configurations. u is
the lower-level control actions, e.g. torques or steerings defined
in (5).
CA is formulated as a convex quadratic programming with
linear constraints. Therefore, at each time step, the lower level
controller solves the following optimization problem,
min ξ v ∗ − Bp u2We + u2Wu
u

s.t.

Aeq u = beq
lb ≤ u ≤ ub

(30)

where, the first term in the objective function of (30) is to minimize the CG forces error, while the second term is to minimize
the control efforts of actuations. lb, ub are the lower and upper
bounds, We , Wu are positive definite weighting matrices, which
give a compromise between two costs. ξ is a used to emphasize the importance of minimizing the allocation error, that
typically set very large. The equality constraint (Aeq u = beq )
could be useful while considering some engineering practices.
For instance, active steering strategy usually makes the steering
angles of the left wheel and right wheel equal. We , Wu may
be time-varying, depending on the driver inputs or road conditions. It reflects how the available actuators will be preferred
and utilized for a integrated control strategy. This brings up a

interesting topic, actuators prioritization, which is omitted for
sake of brevity.
D. Real-Time Constraints
This section discusses about the constraints
from different
T
sides. According to ui = ΔQi Δδi , lbi (2)/ubi (2) denotes
the lower/upper boundary of the active steering angles. They are
mainly constrained by the maximum steering angle of the physical limitation. lbi (1)/ubi (1) denotes the lower/upper boundary
of the active torques (drive or brake),
fail
lbi (1) = max(Qbrake
, −Qtire
i
i , −Qi ) − Qi

(31)

fail
ubi (1) = min(Qdrive
, Qtire
i
i , Qi ) − Qi

(32)

where Qi is the estimated torque of wheel ‘i‘ from the driver’s
request. The lower/upper boundary is obtained by considering
three sets of constraints, i.e. drive/brake torque capacity, tire
force capacity and actuators failure.
is the maximum torque of the wheel that the powQdrive
i
is the maximum brake torque
ertrain can deliver, while Qbrake
i
depending on the vehicle’s braking system on wheels of different
is derived from a ‘tire ellipse model’ [35]. Given
axles. Qtire
i
the estimated tire forces, i.e. fxi , fyi and fzi , the maximum
‘available longitudinal force’ is achieved. One may note that the
wheel slip prevention is not included in this paper. However, it
can be tackled by off-the-shelf modules, i.e., ABS and TCS. Qfail
i
is the torque value when an actuator failure occurs. For example,
a braking actuator locked in a faulty position. Control allocation
has the ability to handle fault-tolerant control [34]. Thanks to
updating constraints in real time, once a fault is detected, CA
will systematically set the lower and upper boundaries to the
locked value or zeros assuming a complete failure. There is no
need to redesign the control laws as the system can allocate the
remaining actuators automatically as to best meet the control
tasks.
V. APPLICATIONS
A. Matrix-Size Reduction
MPC needs larger computational load and memory caches
than classical controls. There are challenges while implemented
within auto-grade electronic control units (ECUs). In addition
to selecting a fast and robust QP solver, another key issue is
the dimension of the system matrices and the number of control
inputs. While applying the proposed controller to a specific case,
in practice, the configuration of the vehicle to be controlled
is prior knowledge, like, axle/articulation configuration; drive
mode and steering system; control objective; active control system. Therefore, it is necessary to adjust the matrix dimension for
computation’s sake. The controller algorithm flowchart in Fig. 4
suggests how it works while giving a vehicle for dynamics control. In offline mode, once the target vehicle is chosen, the vehicle
configurations, stability objectives and physical constraints are
surely acquired. Therefore, ‘Boolean Matrices,’ namely, Tε , Tc
and Tw are defined. Dimensions of model matrices(Ad , Bd , Gd ,
dd and Cd ), the mapping matrix (Bp ), and vectors (x, y, v and

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 17,2026 at 02:39:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: UNIVERSAL AND RECONFIGURABLE STABILITY CONTROL METHODOLOGY

3755

TABLE II
APPLICATIONS DESCRIPTION

∗

Articulated bus: has three axles (axle #1& 4 of unit 1, and axle #4 of unit 2), with 2nd axle drive powered by pure battery; with active trailer steering (−8◦ to 8◦ ), shown in Fig. 5.
Articulated bus: has three axles (axle #1& 4 of unit 1, and axle #4 of unit 2), with 2nd axle drive powered by pure battery; with all wheels differential braking, shown in Fig. 7.
+
Articulated truck: has four axles(axle #1,2& 4 of unit 1, and axle #3 &4 of unit 2), with tractor rear axles drive from an IC engine; with tractor differential braking,shown in Fig. 9.
†

Fig. 4.

Controller algorithm flowchart.

u) are simplified and determined. All matrices are configured to
be the proper size before execution. In online mode, it follows
the two-layer control framework as introduced above. There are
three applications listed in Table II to demonstrate as well as
verify the proposed framework.
B. Controller Parameters and Tuning
There are a great number of research can be found on MPC
tuning methods and industrial applications, where an excellent
review is elaborated in [36] and a detailed study is presented
in [37]. Generally, there are three significant goals when tuning
a MPC controller [38]: (1) achieving appropriate model predictions over the horizon; (2) a compromise between robustness
and performance; (3) a feasible computational cost.
Sample Time & Prediction Horizon: The controller sampling
time Ts is for use in the discrete-time formulation to predict
the future states.If Ts is too big, the model might lose accuracy,
and when a disturbance comes in, the controller will not be
able to react to disturbance fast enough. On the contrary, if the
sample time is too small, the controller can react much faster and
setpoint changes, but costs high computations. Therefore, there
is a trade-off. In order to have accurate predictions, Ts should

be small enough that allows 3-10 steps in the settling of a fastest
dynamics [39]. Others recommend that the sampling time is
between 10% to 25% of the system rise time [40]. By studying
the open-loop response of the vehicle system, this research
tentatively chose 0.015/0.02 s and calculated that Np = 10 for
controller design.
Control Horizon: The future control actions lead to the predicted future output, the number of control moves to time step Nc
are called the control horizon. The smaller the control horizon,
the fewer the computations. However, the minimum horizon will
not give us the best control maneuvers. This leads to a trade-off.
If the control horizon is increased, it results in a more robust but
more aggressive controller as well as larger computational cost.
On the contrary, decreasing the control horizon creates more the
conservativeness and saves computations but with the price of
reducing robustness [36]. It is ideal to set Nc large enough to
cover all significant adjustments of the control sequence in order
to cope with a set-point change. Georgiou et al. [41] chose the
time that takes for the output response to reach 60% of steady
state as control horizon. This research assumes the controller
horizon is equal to prediction horizon for simplicity sake.
Weights: There are weights on the outputs and weights on the
control efforts for both high-level and lower-level controllers.
Weights tuning depends on system requirements and control
desires. For instance, if one emphasizes the tracking accuracy
and wants a more aggressive control performance, more weights
should be put on the tracking error side, i.e., weighting matrix
Q. If robustness and smooth control performance and energy
saving are important, one could increase the weighting matrix R
to realize such goal. In this research, a normalized tuning method
is used for weight tuning [42]. To achieve a robust and satisfying
performance, Trial and error is necessary to see the changes and
balance of the control responses. In addition, when it comes
to production implementation, a fine tuning process is needed
that considers all possible situations, such as, road slope, bank
angle, uncertainties from road friction and side wind. Taking the
Application II (articulated bus with DBS) as a example, Table III
listed the parameters of the controller. One could follow the
similar process to tune the controller for other applications.
C. Application I: An Articulated Bus With ATS
In this case, an articulated bus is built in TruckSim by modifying the templates of it. Trailer sway of tractor semi-trailer is
a serious threat for vehicle safety. In this case, the controller

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 17,2026 at 02:39:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3756

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 4, APRIL 2020

TABLE III
CONTROLLER PARAMETERS OF APP.II

Fig. 5.

A articulated bus with active trailer steering.
Fig. 6.

Results of yaw and sway control of App. I.

Fig. 7.

A articulated bus with differential braking.

aims to tackle the problem. With the prior-knowledge of the
configuration in Table II and Fig. 5, the ‘Articulation, Axle and
Actuator Boolean Matrix’ can be written as,
Tε = I10×10 ;
Tct = diag(1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1);

D. Application II: An Articulated Bus With DBS

Tci = diag(0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1);

In this case, the same articulated bus in App.I but configured with differential braking is built in TruckSim. The main
purpose of this application is to compare the performance of
various differential brake systems, as well as demonstrate the
reconfigurabitliy of the framework. With the prior-knowledge
of the configuration in Table II and Fig. 7, the ‘Articulation and
Axle Boolean Matrix’ are kept same as App. I, but ‘Actuator
Boolean Matrix’ is modified as,

Twt = diag(0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0);
Twi = diag(0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1).
Since the vehicle configuration is given and control objectives
are targeted, matrix dimensions of state space model (24) and
(25) are specified: Ad ∈ R4×4 ; Bd ∈ R4×2 ; Gd ∈ R4×4 ; dd ∈
R4×1 ; x = [vyt rt vyi ri ]T ; v = ΔMzi ; y = [vyt rt λ]T . Regarding the mapping equation (29) and control input, where
Bp ∈ R1×2 ; u = [Δδ1 Δδ2 ]T and Δδ1 = Δδ2 .
A sharp sine impulse steer, with the amplitude of 75 deg
and period of 2 s, described in and top-left corner of Fig. 6 is
performed for this simulation. A constant speed is hold for both
OFF and ON modes for fair comparison purpose. In the control
‘OFF’ mode, a severe trailer sway and tractor yaw oscillation
are triggered. The articulation angle reached as big as 10 deg
and and damped very slow. Note that, the maximum articulation
angle is translated to be around 3 m of the arc length the rear end
swept, which is very dangerous due to the violation to its driving
lane. In addition, neither the leading unit(tractor) is stable in yaw
motion. Through active trailer steering, the articulation angle
is well tracked throughout the maneuver and the sway stopped
after 5th second. As the secondary objective, the tractor yaw rate
tracking shows similar evidence that the vehicle is stabilized.
From the result of active steering angle, it is notable that small
steering adjustments are only needed but the stabilization impact
is huge.

Twt = diag(1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0);
Twi = diag(0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0).
Given the vehicle configuration and control objectives, matrix dimensions of state space model (24) and (25) are specified: Ad ∈ R4×4 ; Bd ∈ R4×2 ; Gd ∈ R4×4 ; dd ∈ R4×1 ; x =
[vyt rt vyi ri ]T ; v = [ΔMzt ΔMzi ]T ; y = [vyt rt λ]T .
For the mapping equation (29), there are three versions of the control strategies listed and named in
Table IV. For ‘Controller A’ where Bp ∈ R1×4 ; u =
[ΔQ1 ΔQ2 ΔQ3 ΔQ4 ]T ; ‘Controller B’ where Bp ∈ R1×2 ;
u = [ΔQ5 ΔQ6 ]T ; ‘Controller C’ where Bp ∈ R2×6 ; u =
[ΔQ1 ΔQ2 ΔQ3 ΔQ4 ΔQ5 ΔQ6 ]T ; Thanks to the reconfigurability of the proposed framework, we can easily design
the different controllers and compare the performance.
Similar to App. I, a sharp sine steer, with the amplitude of
75 deg and period of 2 s ( Table II), is applied to the bus.
In the control ‘OFF’ mode, the bus experienced severe trailer
sway, the articulation angle reached as big as 10 deg, and the
vehicle gets stable gradually. The tractor yaw rate oscillated

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 17,2026 at 02:39:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: UNIVERSAL AND RECONFIGURABLE STABILITY CONTROL METHODOLOGY

3757

TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT CONTROLLER OF APP. II

Fig. 9.

A articulated truck configuration.

Matrix’ can be written as,
Tε = I10×10 ;
Tct = diag(1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1);
Tci = diag(0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1);
Twt = diag(1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0);
Twi = diag(0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0).
Fig. 8. Trailer sway control performance comparison using different active
actuator systems of App. II.

in the same way and time range. By engaging active control
systems, namely, Controller A, B, C, the stabilization is achieved
in a varying extent, described in Table IV. The trailer sway is
effectively restrained in terms of maximum articulation angle
and sway duration. Interestingly, the comparison finds that,
Controller A is more effective on yaw rate tracking control
while the Controller B is more effective on sway stabilization
but with a delay. This makes sense intuitively, as Controller A
uses the differential braking of the tractor while Controller B
uses that of trailer. Besides, Controller C shows the very good
comprehensive performance on both control objectives.

E. Application III: A Commercial Truck
Many tractor trailer combinations have the changeable trailer.
However, the scope of this work assumes the trailer configuration, e.g. axles, is constant and its information is known,
measured/estimated. In this case, a commercial truck with full
payload is built in TruckSim. As mentioned, truck dynamics is
complex and challenging for active controls. In this case, the
controller aims to prevent the likelihood of trailer rollover and
jackknifing, which are the most typical threat to highway safety
of long trucks. With the prior knowledge of the configuration in
Table II and Fig. 9, the ‘Articulation, Axle and Actuator Boolean

Again, with the knowledge of the vehicle configuration and
control objectives, matrix dimensions of state space model
(24) and (25) are specified: Ad ∈ R8×8 ; Bd ∈ R8×1 ; Gd ∈
R8×6 ; dd ∈ R8×1 ; x = [vyt rt φt φ̇t vyi ri φi φ̇i ]T ; v =
ΔMzt ; y = [rt λ RI i ]T .
For the mapping equation (29), where Bp ∈ R1×6 ; u =
[ΔQ1 ΔQ2 ΔQ3 ΔQ4 ΔQ5 ΔQ6 ]T ; Note that, in this
case, the high-level controller only generates the yaw moment
of tractor and the lower-level controller computes the active
brake commands, where, from left to right and front to back,
are indicated by L1, R1 to L3, R3 in Figs. 9 and 10.
In the maneuver of double lane change (DLC) in Fig. 10, a
driver is in the loop using a path-following model of TruckSim.
The driver performed a harsh DLC to avoid potential obstacles
on a highway. The weights of Q are set to emphasize rollover
prevention. The rollover threshold (RImax ) is set to be 0.5 (see
the ‘gray dashed line’). If no active control engaged, the trailer
rollover likelihood is seen at 5th-6th, and 7.5th second. When
differential braking is introduced, the maximum load transfer
ratio of the trailer is reduced by around 36.5% from −0.82 to
−0.52. In addition, the lateral acceleration shows similar evidence on rollover prevention. Although the weights of yaw rate
and articulation angle (in Q) are set very small, the tractor yaw
rate and articulation are also reduced because of the corrective
yaw moment and speed drop.
In the second case, to trigger a jackknife, a step steer and a
step brake of 15 MPa at 2nd second are applied. The tires are
in a high slip or saturation scenarios at the low road friction
coefficient condition. And the huge inertia of the trailer due
to the full load contributes to the likelihood of jackknife. As

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 17,2026 at 02:39:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3758

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 4, APRIL 2020

over-actuation, fault tolerance problems. Two levels are formulated as optimization-based control problems wphen potential
constraints are considered. In the light of three diverse applications presented, it is shown that the proposed system is universal
and reconfigurable as well as effective on the vehicles’ stability
control.
In future work, actuators prioritization will be interesting to
investigate. Suppose the vehicle has more than two active actuation system, e.g., differential braking system and active steering
control. Building certain rules on actuators prioritization and
tuning the controller weighting matrices in realtime is a potential
to achieve so. In addition, it is planned to implement the control
system in the experimental tractor-trailer, so as to validate the
effectiveness and reconfigurability.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Fig. 10.

Results of rollover prevention of App. III.

The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support
of the Ontario Research Fund (OTF) and Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada in this work.
REFERENCES

Fig. 11.

Results of anti-jackknifing of App. III.

shown in Fig. 11, in Control OFF Mode, the articulation angle
kept increasing and diverged to around 90◦ at the 8th second.
Besides, the trailer RI stayed in the high value during the turn.
However, the engagement of differential braking prevented the
truck from jackknife successfully, where the articulation angle
is reduced to 10◦ and RI is dropped to a relatively safe area in
practice.
VI. CONCLUSION
Knowing that articulated/multi-axle vehicles come with significantly various configurations, this paper presented a universal and reconfigurable control methodology that applies to any
vehicles dynamics control. The integrated control formulation
covers longitudinal, yaw, lateral and roll stability objectives and
one can control any combinations of them depending on the
vehicle’s configurations and needs. Moving from one vehicle
to another does not require re-designing the control system,
and major re-tuning is also avoided. We first introduced a
reconfigurable modeling and extended to articulated vehicles,
and then a two-layer control system is designed to cover the
diversity of vehicle configurations, multi-input multi-output,

[1] D. Williams, “Multi-axle vehicle dynamics,” SAE Int., No. SP-2337, 2012,
[Online]. Available: https://www.sae.org/publications/technical-papers/
content/SP-2337/
[2] P. Fancher and C. Winkler, “Directional performance issues in evaluation
and design of articulated heavy vehicles,” Vehicle Syst. Dyn., vol. 45,
no. 7/8, pp. 607–647, 2007.
[3] H. A. Dang and J. Kovanda, “Determination of trajectory of articulated
bus turning along curved line,” Vehicle Syst. Dyn., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 35–44,
2014.
[4] NHTSA. 2017 fatal motor vehicle crashes: Overview. Accessed: 16 Oct.
2018. [Online]. Available: https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/
ViewPublication/812603
[5] U.S. Department of Transportation. Large trucks and buses crash
facts 2016. Accessed: 16 Oct. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.
fmcsa.dot.gov/sites/fmcsa.dot.gov/files/docs/safety/data-an d-statistics/
398686/ltbcf-2016-final-508c-may-2018.pdf
[6] A. S. Trigell, M. RothhÃmel, J. Pauwelussen, and K. Kural, “Advanced
vehicle dynamics of heavy trucks with the perspective of road safety,”
Vehicle Syst. Dyn., vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 1572–1617, 2017.
[7] D. Kasinathan, A. Kasaiezadeh, A. Wong, A. Khajepour, S. Chen, and B.
Litkouhi, “An optimal torque vectoring control for vehicle applications via
real-time constraints,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 4368–
4378, Jun. 2016.
[8] J. Tjonnas and T. Johansen, “Stabilization of automotive vehicles using
active steering and adaptive brake control allocation,” IEEE Trans. Control
Syst. Technol., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 545–558, May 2010.
[9] H. Ohara and T. Murakami, “A stability control by active angle control
of front-wheel in a vehicle system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 55,
no. 3, pp. 1277–1285, Mar. 2008.
[10] R. Wang, H. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Linear parameter-varying controller
design for four-wheel independently actuated electric ground vehicles with
active steering systems,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., vol. 22, no. 4,
pp. 1281–1296, Jul. 2014.
[11] H. Zhang and J. Wang, “Vehicle lateral dynamics control through afs/dyc
and robust gain-scheduling approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65,
no. 1, pp. 489–494, Jan. 2016.
[12] E. Stone and D. Cebon, “Control of semi-active anti-roll systems on heavy
vehicles,” Vehicle Syst. Dyn., vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 1239–1253, 2010.
[13] B. Gysen, J. Paulides, J. Janssen, and E. Lomonova, “Active electromagnetic suspension system for improved vehicle dynamics,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 1156–1163, Mar. 2010.
[14] H. Qi, B. Zhang, N. Zhang, M. Zheng, and Y. Chen, “Enhanced lateral
and roll stability study for a two-axle bus via hydraulically interconnected
suspension tuning,” SAE Int. J. Vehicle Dyn., Stability, NVH, vol. 3, no. 1,
2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 17,2026 at 02:39:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: UNIVERSAL AND RECONFIGURABLE STABILITY CONTROL METHODOLOGY

[15] M. Kissai, B. Monsuez, and A. Tapus, “Review of integrated vehicle
dynamics control architectures,” in Proc. IEEE Mobile Robots (ECMR),
Eur. Conf., Sep. 2018, pp. 1–8.
[16] W. Cho, J. Choi, C. Kim, S. Choi, and K. Yi, “Unified chassis control for
the improvement of agility, maneuverability, and lateral stability,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 1008–1020, Mar. 2012.
[17] J. Wang and R. G. Longoria, “Coordinated and reconfigurable vehicle
dynamics control,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 723–732, May 2009.
[18] S.-K. Chen, W. Deng, Y. A. Ghoneim, N. K. Moshohum, J. R. F. Nardi, and
K. A. Odea, “Architecture and methodology for holistic vehicle control,”
US Patents, no. 8417417B2, 2013.
[19] M. Ataei, A. Khajepour, and S. Jeon, “A novel reconfigurable integrated
vehicle stability control with omni actuation systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 2945–2957, Apr. 2018.
[20] Y. Zhang, A. Khajepour, and Y. Huang, “Multi-axle/articulated bus dynamics modeling: A reconfigurable approach,” Vehicle Syst. Dyn., vol. 56,
no. 2, pp. 1–29, 2018.
[21] Y. Zhang, A. Khajepour, and M. Ataei, “Universal model-based stability
control for ground vehicles with any axle and actuation configuration,”
Vehicle Syst. Dyn., pp. Under Review, 2019.
[22] E. Fiala, “Lateral forces on rolling pneumatic tires,” Zeitschrift V.D.I.,
vol. 96, no. 29, pp. 973–979, 1954.
[23] C. E. Beal and J. C. Gerdes, “Model predictive control for vehicle stabilization at the limits of handling,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol.,
vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1258–1269, Jul. 2013.
[24] R. Rajamani, Vehicle Dynamics and Control. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2011.
[25] M. Ataei, A. Khajepour, and S. Jeon, “A general rollover index for
tripped and un-tripped rollovers on flat and sloped roads,” in Proc.
Inst. Mech. Eng., D: J. Autom. Eng., vol. 233, no. 2, pp. 304–316, doi:
10.1177/0954407017743345.
[26] S. Lapapong, A. Brown, K. Swanson, and S. N. Brennan, “Zero-moment
point determination of worst-case manoeuvres leading to vehicle wheel
lift,” Vehicle Syst. Dyn., vol. 50, no. sup1, pp. 191–214, 2012.
[27] P. G. Stankiewicz, A. A. Brown, and S. N. Brennan, “Preview horizon
analysis for vehicle rollover prevention using the zero-moment point,”
J. Dyn. Syst., Meas., Control, vol. 137, no. 9, 2015, Art. no. 091002.
[28] J. Kang, J. Yoo, and K. Yi, “Driving control algorithm for maneuverability,
lateral stability, and rollover prevention of 4WD electric vehicles with
independently driven front and rear wheels,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 2987–3001, Sep. 2011.
[29] J. Y. Wong, Theory of Ground Vehicles, 4th ed. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley,
2008.
[30] F. Borrelli, A. Bemporad, and M. Morari, Predictive Control for Linear
and Hybrid Systems. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2017.
[31] S. Chang and T. J. Gordon, “Model-based predictive control of vehicle
dynamics,” Int. J. Vehicle Auton. Syst., vol. 5, no. 1-2, pp. 3–27, 2007.
[32] P. Falcone, F. Borrelli, H. Tseng, J. Asgari, and D. Hrovat, “Linear
time-varying model predictive control and its application to active steering
systems: Stability analysis and experimental validation,” Int. J. Robust
Nonlinear Control, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 862–875, 2008.
[33] H. Ferreau, C. Kirches, A. Potschka, H. Bock, and M. Diehl, “qpOASES:
A parametric active-set algorithm for quadratic programming,” Math.
Program. Comput., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 327–363, 2014.
[34] T. A. Johansen and T. I. Fossen, “Control allocation: A survey,” Automatica, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1087–1103, 2013.
[35] H. Pacejka, Tire and Vehicle Dynamics. New York, NY, USA: Elsevier
Science, 2012.
[36] J. L. Garriga and M. Soroush, “Model predictive control tuning methods:
A review,” Ind. Eng. Chemistry Res., vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 3505–3515, 2010.
[37] Y. Zhang, “Multi-axle vehicle modeling and stability control: A reconfigurable approach, Chapter 4,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Mech. Mechatron.
Eng., Univ. Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, 2019.
[38] S. J. Qin and T. A. Badgwell, “A survey of industrial model predictive
control technology,” Control Eng. Pract., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 733–764,
2003.
[39] S. D. Cairano and I. V. Kolmanovsky, “Real-time optimization and model
predictive control for aerospace and automotive applications,” pp. 2392–
2409, 2018.

3759

[40] A. Bemporad, M. Morari, and N. L. Ricker, Model Predictive Control
Toolbox User’s Guide. Massachusetts, MA, USA: The Mathworks, Inc.,
2010.
[41] A. Georgiou, C. Georgakis, and W. L. Luyben, “Nonlinear dynamic matrix
control for high-purity distillation columns,” AIChE J., vol. 34, no. 8,
pp. 1287–1298, 1988.
[42] R. M. Murray, “Optimization-based control,” California Inst. Technol.,
California, CA, USA, pp. 111–128, 2009.

Yubiao Zhang received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in mechanical engineering, specializing in vehicle mechatronics, from Hunan University, Changsha,
China, in 2012 and 2015, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree in mechanical engineering from the University
of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 2019. From
2015 to 2016, he was a System Engineer with Sandy
Tech Company, Ltd., China. He is currently a Researcher with General Motors, Global R&D in USA.
His research interests include vehicle dynamics, reconfigurable control and optimization, and automated
driving.

Amir Khajepour is currently a Professor of mechanical and mechatronics engineering with the University
of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada. He holds the Tier
1 Canada Research Chair in Mechatronic Vehicle Systems, and a Senior NSERC/General Motors Industrial
Research Chair in Holistic Vehicle Control. He has
developed an extensive research program that applies
his expertise in several key multidisciplinary areas
including system modeling and control of dynamic
systems. His research has resulted in many patents
and technology transfers. He is a Fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
and the Canadian Society of Mechanical Engineering.

Mansour Ataei received the Ph.D. degree in mechanical and mechatronics engineering from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 2017,
and the B.S. and M.S. degrees in mechanical engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran,
in 2007 and 2010, respectively. He is currently a
Control System Engineer with the Active Safety;
Autonomous Systems Department, General Motors
of Canada Company, Markham, ON, Canada. His
research interests include modeling and control of
dynamic systems, vehicle dynamics control, and autonomous vehicles. He has worked on integrated vehicle stability systems,
rollover detection and prevention systems, and control of small and narrow
vehicles.

Authorized licensed use limited to: King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi. Downloaded on March 17,2026 at 02:39:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

